6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
3
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Kinetic control of the coverage of oil droplets by DNA-functionalised colloids

Darshana Joshi,1 Dylan Bargteil,2 Alessio Caciagli,1 Jerome Burelbach,1 Zhongyang Xing,1
Andr´e S. Nunes,3 Diogo E. P. Pinto,3 Nuno A. M. Ara´ujo,3 Jasna Bruijc,2 and Erika Eiser1, ∗

1Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom

2Center for Soft Matter Research and Department of Physics,

New York University, NewYork, New York, 10003, USA.

3Departamento de F´ısica, Faculdade de Ciˆencias, and Centro de F´ısica Te´orica e Computacional,

Universidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande, P-1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.

(Dated: March 21, 2016)

We report a study of reversible adsorption of DNA-coated colloids on complementary functional-
ized oil droplets. We show that it is possible to control the surface coverage of oil droplets by colloidal
particles, by exploiting the fact that during slow adsorption, compositional arrest takes place well
before structural arrest occurs. As a consequence, we can prepare colloid-coated oil droplets with
a ‘frozen’ degree of loading, but with fully ergodic colloidal dynamics on the droplets. We illus-
trate the equilibrium nature of the adsorbed colloidal phase by exploring the quasi two-dimensional
(2d) phase behaviour of the adsorbed colloids under the inﬂuence of depletion interactions. We
present simulations of a simple model that illustrates the nature of the compositional arrest and the
structural ergodicity.

Keywords: Smart emulsions — Colloidal aggregation — Self-assembly — DNA functionalization

INTRODUCTION

One of the key challenges in complex self-assembly is
the creation of ordered, quasi-2d patterns of many dis-
tinct colloids or nano-particles. To achieve this objective,
it is important that the substrate is smooth and clean,
and that diﬀerent species of colloidal particles can bind
independently and reversibly to the surface. Moreover,
the surface-bound particles should be suﬃciently mobile
to ensure that the structure that is most stable is also
kinetically accessible.

Most solid substrates are less than ideal for this pur-
pose:
the surfaces often contain defects or impurities
that trap colloids and, in addition, bound colloids dif-
fuse slowly on such surfaces. Liquid interfaces would
be less susceptible to the above problems, however the
strength with which colloids bind to liquid-liquid inter-
faces (through the Pickering mechanism) may be hun-
dred or thousand times stronger than the thermal en-
ergy and, as a consequence, controlled and reversible ad-
sorption of diﬀerent species is diﬃcult to achieve [1–5].
In addition, control of the interactions between surface-
incorporated colloids is diﬃcult because of the dominance
of long-ranged capillary forces [6–8].

Here we introduce a new strategy to assemble colloids
reversibly at a liquid-liquid interface. To achieve this
we functionalize both the liquid-liquid interface and the
colloidal surface, in such a way that colloids can bind re-
versibly to the interface, through complementary DNA
interactions. Of course, DNA has been used extensively
as selective glue between nano to micron-sized solid col-
loids [9–12]. Other groups have explored functional-
izing vesicles or ﬂuid membranes with single-stranded
(ss)DNA [13, 14]. A hybrid approach [15] involved func-
tionalizing ﬂuid membranes enveloping hard spherical

colloids, and Feng et al.
[16] have explored the use of
DNA-functionalized oil droplets (OD). The motivation
for using such ﬂuid substrates was to ensure that the
grafted ssDNA could diﬀuse on the surface. The DNA
can then accumulate into ‘rafts’ at the point of contact
between two particles with complementary functionaliza-
tion. A drawback of the above strategies to achieve mo-
bile grafting was that the amount of ssDNA that could
be incorporated into the phospholipid bilayers or mono-
layers was quite limited [13, 16]. Here we present an
approach that overcomes this drawback. This allows us
to create oil droplets that are densely grafted with mobile
ssDNA.

In our approach we rely on the creation of oil droplets
(ODs) with a typical diameter of 20 − 30 µm, sta-
bilised by sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), onto which we
adsorb polylysine-g[3.5]-polyethyleneglycol-biotin (PLL-
PEG-bio), a comb-like polyelectrolyte. As illustrated in
Fig. 1 the positively charged poly-lysine backbone ad-
sorbs in a ﬂat manner onto the negatively charged SDS
head-groups that are exposed to the oil-water interface.
To every third to fourth lysine repeat unit a 2 or 3.4 kD
PEG chain is attached. Half of the roughly 40 PEG
chains per PLL backbone carry a biotin group, which
we functionalized with streptavidin from solution. Fi-
nally, biotinylated ssDNA, denoted A, was brought onto
the OD’s surfaces via the streptavidin. Thus we created
small ﬂat patches of PLL molecules that diﬀuse freely
with their DNA on the oil-water interface. Adding to
the ODs 0.57 µm large polystyrene (PS) particles with
the complementary ssDNA, A’, these anchor reversibly
to the interfaces via DNA hybridization. Depending on
the solvent conditions, this seemingly simple system ex-
hibits an unexpectedly rich quasi-2d phase diagram of
colloid aggregation.

RESULTS

Preparation of oild droplets (ODs)

The ODs were prepared in a microﬂuidic device. Prior
to its use the device was plasma cleaned and immediately
afterwards ﬁlled with water to slow down the loss of hy-
drophilicity of the device walls, and tested for leaks. The
channels used were 20 µm wide and 25 µm high. Firstly,
5 to 10 mM SDS solution was ﬂushed in at 250 µL/hr
to ﬂood the channel. Once SDS has ﬁlled the chan-
nel, 50 cSt silicone oil (0.971 g/mL) was introduced at
25 µL/hr into the channels. Droplets formed at the junc-
tion and were collected at the outlet (Fig.1A). We used
Nemesys and Harvard pumps. ODs were stored in the
fridge in a 10 mM SDS solution – they remained stable
for a minimum of one year. The SDS was purchased from
Sigma and used as received. All solutions were prepared
in deionized water.

DNA Functionalization of ODs

The coverage of PLL-PEG-bio on the OD was tested
by binding ﬂuorescently labelled streptavidin to the bi-
otinylated PEG ends (Fig.
1A(iii)). While a lysine
monomer carries one positive charge on the amino group,
the repeat-units linked to a PEG chain via that amino
group are neutral. Hence, each PLL backbone made of
137 repeat units will carry ∼40 positive charges [17],
allowing the backbone to adsorb ﬂat on the negatively
charged SDS head-groups at the OD-water interface. The
hydrophilic, uncharged and ﬂexible PEG side chains align
perpendicular to the interface forming a comb-like ge-
ometry [17, 18]. Note that the biotin-terminated PEG
chains are with 3.4 kDa longer than the other ones ren-
dering the biotin accessible. After removing excess PLL-
PEG-bio from the OD solution Texas Red labelled strep-
tavidin was added adsorbing readily to the biotinylated
PEG end groups. The clearly visible ﬂuorescence on the
OD surfaces (Fig. 1B) supports the assumption that the
PLL-PEG-bio chains are located at the oil-water inter-
face. We used ﬂuorescence intensity measurements to es-
timate the maximum PLL-PEG-bio grafting density for
a ﬁxed volume of ODs (Fig. S1). All experiments pre-
sented here were performed at the onset of the saturated
grafting regime to avoid free, unbound chains in solution.
An increase in ﬂuorescence intensity by several orders
of magnitudes was observed, in comparison to that of
biotinylated lipid-monolayer stabilised droplets reported
earlier [16]. Here, we obtained a higher coverage of strep-
tavidin linkers (∼ 104 µm−2) on the OD surface, which
corresponds to an average distance of 10 nm between
biotin-streptavidin ends. After removing excess strep-
tavidin from the continuous aqueous phase, we grafted
biotinylated ssDNA, A, to the OD-solution—again any

2

FIG. 1. A) Cartoon representing various stages of the sam-
ple preparation:
i) SDS stabilised droplets are prepared by
mixing 10 mM SDS and silicone oil
in a microﬂuidic de-
vice.(ii) PLL-PEG-Biotin adsorbs ﬂat on the SDS stabilised
oil droplets that are negatively charged due to the sulphate
head group of the SDS surfactant (iii) Texas Red labelled
streptavidin linkers are then attached to the Biotin heads on
the ODs from solution, (iv) biotinylated ssDNA (A) is then
added attaching to these streptavidin linkers. (v) Green ﬂu-
orescent polystyrene colloids coated with complementary A’
DNA are then allowed to bind by DNA hybridization . (B)
Fluorescence images of the oil droplets after attaching the ﬂu-
orescent streptavidin from solution, and (C) a typical image
showing the ﬂuorescent colloids hybridized to the OD surfaces
with a zoom onto the south pole of the droplet.

unbound DNA was removed before adding green ﬂuores-
cent, 0.52 µm large, A’ DNA coated polystyrene colloids.
Care was taken to keep the ﬁnal aqueous condition con-
stant with an added NaCl concentration of ∼ 50 mM .
The samples were studied using epiﬂuorescence video mi-
croscopy after incubating the samples overnight, allowing
for DNA equilibrium-hybridization. In most samples we
used colloidal bulk volume fractions of Φc ≤ 0.05%. Fo-
cusing on the ’south pole’ of the ODs that are located
at the top surface of the sealed capillaries (Fig.1C) it
becomes apparent that the PS particles have hybridized
to the ODs, while a considerable fraction of the colloids
remained in the aqueous bulk phase.

Colloidal 2d-aggregation at the oil-water interface

While keeping the PLL-PEG-bio and A DNA cover-
age approximately constant for all experiments we stud-
ied the eﬀect of varying the SDS concentration on the
aggregation behaviour of the PS-colloids hybridized to
the ODs (Fig. 2). As we increased the excess SDS con-
centration in bulk, we observed a transition from a gas-

3

FIG. 2. Comparison between experimental and numerical re-
sults. Top row : Fluorescence micrographs (under GFP il-
lumination) showing change in the packing of the 0.52 µm
polystyrene colloids on the surface of ODs as a function of
SDS concentration in the bulk of the sample. The colloids go
from A) a colloidal gas-like phase to B) a liquid-like cluster to
C) well aligned hexagonal packing at the interface. Bottom
row : Snapshots for diﬀerent strengths of the Asakura-Oosawa
potential: D) VAO = 0, E) 6, and F) 8. These images were
modulated with a Gaussian blur emulating the experimental
situation.

like distribution of hybridized PS-colloids (SDS concen-
trations < 2 mM ; Supporting Video SV 1) to the for-
mation of 2d ‘continents’ with crystalline order at higher
concentrations of SDS (> 5 mM ; SV 2). Between 2 mM
and 4 mM SDS concentrations, a two-phase region was
observed, where individual hybridized colloids coexisted
with more disordered ‘ﬂuid-like’ colloidal islands contain-
ing more than just a few colloids (Fig. 2B). We attribute
this behavior to depletion attraction induced by SDS mi-
celles. All samples showed a considerable fraction of free,
non-hybridized colloids in solution. These did not aggre-
gate because of the steric stabilization provided by the
A’ DNA brush on the colloids. However, at SDS con-
centrations above 2 mM , we also observed weak colloidal
aggregation in bulk, again presumably due to depletion
forces.

Melting-oﬀ colloids from the OD Surfaces

One of the most striking features of the colloid-OD sys-
tem is that the loading of oil droplets by colloids appears
to depend on the preparation protocol, even though the
colloids on the ODs are highly mobile. As we argue be-
low, this protocol dependence is due to the fact that dur-
ing slow deposition, colloids have more time to ‘collect’
the PLL-PEG-DNA ‘receptors’ than during fast deposi-

FIG. 3. Sequence of ﬂuorescence images heating a sample of
0.57 µm colloids grafted to ODs using colloids A) fully cov-
ered with A’ DNA (∼ 1.5 mM ) SDS and 50 mM NaCl con-
centrations); and B) where 3/4 of the A’ DNA are replaced
by non-binding B (∼ 2.5 mM SDS and 50 mM SDS) . In all
images we focus on the south pole of the ODs using the same
illumination and exposure time. A) For full coverage most
colloids remained on the OD surface even when heating to
80 ◦C, though they became increasingly more mobile, which
is expressed in the increasingly more blurry appearance of the
images. B) For samples with reduced number of binding sites
on the colloids melting set in at ∼ 56 ◦C, and at ∼ 70 ◦C
almost all colloids have come oﬀ the ODs. The image taken
shortly after cooling the sample (over a period of 1 h) to 14 ◦C
showed only few colloids bound to the ODs. The same sample
recovered similar coverage and aggregation state as the initial
samples after 1 day (bottom most right image).

tion. In fact, during slow deposition, the bound colloids
deplete the remaining PLL-PEG-bio domains from the
interface, so that no further colloids can bind.

We ﬁrst veriﬁed whether it was possible to remove the
colloids from the OD-water interface by heating the sam-
ple well above the hybridization (‘melt’) temperature,
Tm (cid:39) 32 ◦C, for the sequence used here. The width of the
melt region for complementary ssDNA free in solution is
typically ∆T ∼ 10−20 ◦C, depending on the solvent con-
ditions and the DNA concentration [19], but it narrows
down to ∼ 1 ◦C when the same DNA strands are attached
to colloids [12]; moreover Tm shifts to higher values. In a
control experiment in which we mixed 0.52 µm particles
functionalized with A or with A’ in a 1:1 ratio, using the
same solvent condition as those used in the OD experi-
ments, we measured Tm (cid:39) 35 ◦C (Fig. S2).
We ﬁrst mixed A’-functionalized 0.52 µm particles
with the A-coated ODs (∼ 2 mM SDS, 4 mM Tris pH
7-8, 50 mM NaCl) and let the colloids hybridize to the
ODs overnight at room temperature. The ﬂuorescence
images in Fig. 3A show that at room temperature liquid

Concentration  of  SDS  @  ~  50  mMNaCl1  –2    mM2.5  –4  mM>  5  mM10  μm10  μm10  μmVAO=  0VAO=  6VAO=  8A)B)C)D)E)F)colloidal islands coexist with non-aggregated colloids hy-
bridized to the interface at this SDS concentration. As we
increased the temperature (using a computer-controlled
piezoelectric heating stage on the microscope) these is-
lands became smaller and more mobile, but even when
heating beyond 35 ◦C the colloids did not detach from
the droplet surface — rather, the particles diﬀused ever
faster. Even at 80 ◦C very few particles came oﬀ. We
hypothesize that the reason for the strong binding of the
colloids is that, as the A DNA on the PLL-PEG is mo-
bile, A DNA will accumulate in the contact region and
hence the binding strength will increase with time. Con-
sequently the ﬁnal number of A-A’ bonds in the contact
region will be in this case larger (and Tm will be higher)
than for the contact region between two hard spheres
where the A DNA is ﬁxed. This eﬀect will be enhanced
by the fact that the eﬀective contact region between col-
loids and ODs is larger than between two colloids with the
same curvature. However, clearly, the binding strength
should still decrease as we decrease the overall A’ DNA
concentration. To test this hypothesis we reduced the
total number of A’ strands on the PS particles by re-
placing 70% of the A’ strands by non-complementary B
strands (see Materials & Methods). The images for in-
creasing temperatures in Fig. 3B show that now particles
start to melt oﬀ the surface at ∼ 56 ◦C; at ∼ 66 ◦C al-
most all bound particles have left the OD surfaces. This
supports our assumption that the colloid-OD binding is
due to DNA hybridisation and that the very strong bind-
ing experienced by colloids with a dense A’ coating is
due to the accumulation of complementary, PLL-PEG
bound DNA in the contact region. We also note that
the melting region is not as sharp as for hard particles,
although a larger number of binding DNA in the con-
tact area would suggest a narrowing of the melt region.
This widening can be understood by considering that the
distribution of PLL-PEG bound DNA over the diﬀerent
colloidal contacts is determined by kinetics: some col-
loids will accumulate more than others. However, once
bound, redistribution of PLL-PEG-DNA domains over
diﬀerent colloidal contacts is very slow. Hence, some col-
loids are more strongly bound than others. This broad-
ening will only occur if the deposition of colloids on the
ODs is relatively fast. Otherwise, every colloid that lands
on the surface has time to accumulate its full share of
PLL-PEG-DNA. But of course, this also means that less
PLL-PEG-DNA remains for any subsequent colloids.

When starting with a high Φc, there is no time for
the colloids to collect their share of PLL-PEG-DNA and
hence more remains for subsequent colloids, and indeed,
if we start with a high Φc, a higher density of colloids on
the ODs is observed, which automatically leads to fewer
DNA bridges between any given colloid and the OD, and
therefore to a reduced Tm.

Note that after melting oﬀ the particles the initial par-
ticle grafting density on the OD’s is recovered upon cool-

4

ing to 20 ◦C, be it that the process is very slow. An
hour after cooling initially to 14 ◦C few colloids have hy-
bridized back to the ODs, and only after 1 day at room
temperature we recover the initial colloid density (Fig.
3B).

Simulations

As it is diﬃcult to probe the distribution of colloid-
OD bonds directly in experiments, we used kinetic Monte
Carlo simulations to investigate the factors that aﬀect the
protocol-dependent OD-colloid binding. In these simula-
tions, the interface is described as a 2d discrete square-
lattice with a given density of square patches, ρp. A
patch represents a single DNA-functionalized PLL-PEG-
biotin chain of length lp, in units of lattice sites, and an
interfacial diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dp. We represent the con-
tact region of the colloids with the interface by a square
of length lC. The number of colloids that arrive per unit
time at the oil-water interface is denoted by F (the ‘ﬂux’).
F increases monotonically with the bulk concentration
Φc. In our simulations we assume that the colloids bind
irreversibly if they overlap with at least one site of the
patch. Both colloids and patches are assumed to be im-
penetrable. Since we are interested in the initial stage
of binding, we ignore the diﬀusion of colloid-patch com-
plexes. However, free patches can diﬀuse and thus ac-
cumulate in accessible sites underneath a colloid-patch
complex forming a raft. The simulations conﬁrm that as
F decreases, the limiting density of surface bound colloids
decreases, due to the depletion of accessible patches.

We also used numerical simulations to study the 2D-
aggregation behaviour of the bound colloids on the SDS
concentration. To this end, we used Brownian dynam-
ics simulations on a curved interface describing the pair-
wise colloid interactions by the superposition of a repul-
sive Yukawa and the short-ranged, attractive Asakura-
Oosawa (AO) potential. Keeping the fraction of bound
colloids per OD constant, we increased the strength of
the attraction — it scales linearly with the micelle con-
centration. Figures 2D-F show snapshots for diﬀerent
strengths of the AO potential. As observed experimen-
tally, by increasing the density of depletant we observe
a transition from a ﬂuid-like structure to crystalline-like
order (Fig. 2).

Particle tracking, diﬀerential dynamic microscopy

(DDM), microrheology

To understand how binding to the OD interface aﬀects
the dynamics of the colloids compared to free particle
motion in bulk we performed particle tracking and DDM
measurements. For particle tracking, we used 1.2 µm PS
colloids coated with a grafting density of A’ DNA com-

5

used Diﬀerential Dynamic Microscopy (DDM) to extract
the particle diﬀusivities on the ODs and in bulk [21, 22].
Similar to the larger particles a considerable reduction
in the diﬀusivity (∼ 2.4 × 10−13 m2s−1) of bound col-
loids is found, while the value Dsol ∼ 9.52× 10−13 m2s−1
measured for the free particles is again similar to the the-
oretical one (Fig. 4C & D, and SV1). Note, the DDM
results for the particles on the OD surface have a larger
error because of the reduced statistics as we limited the
sampling to the small region on the south pole to avoid
systematic errors due to the curvature of the droplets.

Discussion

The experimental results demonstrate three facts:
Firstly that the attachment of our colloids was driven
by DNA binding; secondly that this hybridization be-
tween colloid and complementary DNA on the surfaces
of the ODs was thermally reversible; and thirdly that
colloids attached to the surface underwent aggregation,
which was purely driven by depletion attraction caused
by the surfactant micelles present [23–25]. All our exper-
imental ﬁndings are supported by the simulation results.
Further proof that our colloids were indeed anchored to
the OD-surfaces purely via DNA-hybridization and not
due to surface tension eﬀects like in Pickering-Ramsdon
emulsions or other non-speciﬁc interactions came from
several diﬀerent control experiments.
In the ﬁrst we
mixed our OD solutions with colloids coated with non-
complementary B DNA, using the standard solvent con-
ditions with an SDS concentration of ∼ 2 mM . No col-
loidal adsorption to the ODs was observed, even after a
week. In the second control sample we replaced the A
DNA on the ODs by PEG-Biotin that formed a similar
steric stabilization layer as the DNA linkers, while the
colloids were either grafted with A’ or B DNA. These
samples also did not show any signs of binding between
the ODs and the colloids. Even the mixtures of DNA-
coated colloids and bare SDS-stabilised ODs did not dis-
play any colloidal adsorption on the oil-water interfaces
at all bulk SDS-concentrations used.

In all OD-colloid mixtures, irrespective of the bulk SDS
concentration, a large number of colloids remained in so-
lution. As described in the section on melting colloids oﬀ
the OD-surfaces, we propose that the amount of colloids
hybridized to the ODs depends on the total colloid vol-
ume fraction Φc. Starting with a Φc (cid:39) 0.05 wt%, which
corresponded roughly to a full DNA coverage of the ODs
in solution, we obtained a relatively high colloid coverage
(Fig. 1&2) but still a number of colloids remained free in
bulk solution. Using a ten times lower Φc, such as used
for tracking purposes, we observed much fewer colloids
on the OD surfaces. We argue that most of the A DNA
bound via the PLL-PEG-bio chains was recruited by the
hard colloids forming small rafts of several chains in the

FIG. 4. A) Mean square displacement versus delay time for
1.2 µm colloids diﬀusing free in solution, and B) for DNA-
bound colloids diﬀusing on the OD surfaces averaged over 5
tracks. The inset shows a typical single-particle track. C) Mi-
croscope image of 0.57 µm colloids bound to an OD surface
focusing on its south pole. The square selection was used for
DDM analysis. D) Decay time τ (q) as a function of the scat-
tering vector q extracted from DDM analysis for both colloids
diﬀusing on OD surfaces (as shown in C) and from microscope
movies taken from free colloids in solution; the theoretical line
passing through the data for the free colloids were obtained
assuming a colloid diameter of 0.57 µm, a viscosity of buﬀer
solution of 0.9 mP a s, and RT.

parable to the one used on the smaller particles. We
also lowered the overall added colloid concentration thus
assuring low particle concentrations on the OD surface.
We only track trajectories close to the south pole such
that the particles move mostly in a plane perpendicu-
lar to the viewing direction. We study root mean-square
displacements that are much smaller than the radius of
the OD and hence we assume that the curvature of the
ODs can be neglected in the analysis of the diﬀusive mo-
tion (see Fig. 4A and supporting video SV3; SV4 shows
tracking in the bulk). The averaged diﬀusion coeﬃcient,
DOD ∼ 4.0 × 10−14 m2/s−1, obtained for 1.2 µm colloids
bound to the ODs was found to be reduced by one order
of magnitude compared with that of free particles in solu-
tion, Dsol ∼ 3.37 × 10−13 m2s−1; the latter value is close
to the theoretical estimate Dtheo = 4.11 × 10−13 m2s−1
(Fig.
4B). Particle tracking of free PS particles was
done in the absence of ODs, but under equivalent sol-
vent conditions and temperature. Feeding the displace-
ments extracted from the same particle tracks into an
in-situ analysis program [20] we also extracted the ef-
fective viscoelastic properties the bound colloids experi-
enced. These suggest that the colloids experience a vis-
cosity of (9.5 ± 0.6) mP a s, which is roughly 10 times
larger than that of water.

For samples with only 0.52 µm particles present we

contact region. However, when using higher initial colloid
concentrations these rafts would be smaller. Once all A
DNA was bound no further colloids were able to bind to
the oil-water interface. The interfacial regions free of col-
loids can thus be thought of as regions purely stabilised
by SDS. Or in other words, the colloid hybridization leads
to segregation into regions of a pure SDS monolayer and
others holding the PLL-PEG-bio with the DNA. Because
of the ﬂuorescence of the streptavidin attached to the bi-
otins on the PLL-PEG was much weaker than that on the
colloids we could not observe this segregation in experi-
ments. However, our simulation studies strongly support
our assumptions.

The strong slowing down of the colloidal diﬀusion on
the ODs also supports our hypothesis that several mo-
bile PLL-PEG-bio chains form rafts. It appears that the
measured colloidal diﬀusion coeﬃcients are dominated by
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the rafts. We have shown that
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of colloids sedimented onto either
a ‘soft’ cross-linked polymer surface or a ‘hard’ sterically
stabilised support surface does not deviate more than
some 10% from their bulk diﬀusion value [26], while here
we observed a reduction of one order of magnitude.

Saﬀman and Delbr¨uck [27] recognized early on that the
Brownian motion of proteins attached to a lipid bilayer
can be expressed in form of the Stokes-Einstein relation of
the translational diﬀusion coeﬃcient, D = kBT b, where
kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T the temperature and b
the mobility of the protein (for a free sphere in solu-
tion b = (6πηR)−1, with η being the viscosity and R the
radius of the particles). However, this mobility will be
dominated by the viscoelasticity of that layer. They de-
rived an analytical expression for a modiﬁed mobility of
a cylindrical disk embedded in the double-layer. Their
work was extended to monolayers separating two phases
by Fisher et al. and by others, deriving complex expres-
sions and veriﬁed in part by simulations [28, 29]. Sickert
and Rondelez reported experimental results on the diﬀu-
sion of colloidal particles located at the water-air inter-
face separated by lipid monolayers of diﬀerent densities
[30]. They found a reduction in the colloids translational
diﬀusion coeﬃcient by one to two orders of magnitude.

Here we give a rough estimate of the diﬀusivity of the
PLL-PEG-bio rafts. We argue that the PLL chains are in
a rather stretched conﬁguration on the surface (Fig. S3)
due to steric hindrance between the PEG chains [17, 31].
The positively charged polylysine will be bound to the
SDS surfactants at the water-oil interface, where the hy-
drophobic tails of the surfactants extend into the roughly
50 times more viscous oil phase. We can estimate the
−1,
mobility of such a chain byb = (6π (ηoil + ηwater) R)
where the length of the stretched PLL chains is ∼ 48 nm,
assuming that the length of a lysine monomer is 0.355 nm
[17]. This gives us a translational diﬀusion coeﬃcient of
DPLL (cid:39) 1.8×10−13 m2s−1, which is about a tenth of that
of the free 0.52µm particles (Dsol = 9.52× 10−13 m2s−1)

6

and surprisingly close to those bound to the surface
(DOD ∼ 2.4 × 10−13 m2s−1). A slightly larger reduction
is observed for the 1.2µm particles, which is in agree-
ment with our assumption that a larger raft of several
PLL-PEG-bio chains may be bound in the contact re-
gion. Hence the colloid motion is dominated by the vis-
cous drag of the monolayer-raft with the oil. This ﬁnding
seems in agreement with the microrheology data, which
suggest that the larger colloids experience an apparent
viscosity of about 9. mP a s, while we extract a viscos-
ity of ∼ 3.5 mP a s from the DDM measurements of the
bound smaller colloids.

Our results presented in Fig. 2 demonstrate that the
surfactant concentration is an important ingredient in
our systems aggregation behaviour.
In the ﬁnal OD-
colloid mixture we adjusted the SDS concentration in the
aqueous bulk. For the buﬀer solution with 50 mM added
NaCl concentration a minimum of 1 − 2 mM SDS con-
centration was required in order to prevent coalescence
of the oil droplets. This SDS concentration is just be-
low the Critical Micelle Concentration (CMC) for SDS,
which is around 2.5 mM for the ionic strength used in our
experiments. Hence, at higher SDS concentrations we
create more and more micelles, which induce increasingly
stronger depletion attraction between the DNA-stabilised
colloids that do not aggregate in the same salty buﬀer so-
lution but in absence of any surfactant. Depletion attrac-
tions between large colloids in bulk solution, induced by
small colloids or polymers, have been studied extensively
in theory, simulations and experiments [32–35]. Fewer
studies used charged surfactant micelles as the deplet-
ing agent. Iracki et al. observed the aggregation behav-
ior of ‘hard’, negatively charged silica beads sedimented
onto a non-sticking glass surface in the presence of SDS
[36]. Similar to our experiments they showed that be-
low the CMC hard sphere repulsion dominated, while an
increasingly deeper attractive minimum emerged as the
SDS concentration increased beyond the CMC. Again,
our simulation results conﬁrm that scenario.

Also, when we go to higher SDS concentrations we see
ordered 2d crystals with faceted boundaries. Similar to
the observations by Meng et al [37] made on depletion
driven colloidal aggregation on the inside of emulsion
droplets these crystals remain ﬁnite size and ‘fracture’
due to the competition between elastic deformation of the
2d crystals that prefer a ﬂat arrangement and the bind-
ing strength of the colloids to the interface via DNA. As
the melting experiments demonstrate any clusters formed
at room temperature will become smaller and more mo-
bile upon heating. To summarize, we have introduced a
new colloid aggregation mechanism on emulsion droplets
that allow reversible detachment from the OD surface in
a controlled manner using DNA hybridization. The fact
that the hybridization recruits the mobile linkers between
the colloids and the OD may be used as model system to
understand and study the dynamics of particle or protein

adsorption to biological molecules in a crowded environ-
ment. The very slow dynamics of the aggregation process
may help understand how this aggregation can be con-
trolled [18, 38].

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Coating droplets and colloids with DNA

The DNA strands used in experiments have been purchased
from Integrated DNA Technology (IDT). The three sticky
ends are A = 5’–CCG GCC–3’, A’ = 5’–GGC CGG–3’, B =
5’–CG CAG CAC C–3’. The XX’ pair acted as rigid double-
stranded spacer as described in earlier work [39]. They were
hybridized prior to being attached to either the oil droplets
(A) or the colloids (A’).

In order to achieve a similar DNA-binding capacity/µm2
on the oil droplet as that on the colloids, 50 µl of the
freshly prepared oil droplets stabilised in 10 mM SDS so-
lutions were taken from the creamed layer and mixed with
22.5 µl (1 mg/mL) of PLL (20)-g[3.5]- PEG(2)/PEG(3.4)-
biotin(50%) (purchased from SuSoS AG, Switzerland) and
250 µl of 1 mM SDS, 4 mM Tris buﬀer pH 7.5, maintain-
ing an overall 50 mM concentration of NaCl and > 2 mM
concentration of SDS. This mixture was incubated on rollers
overnight and washed twice with a wash solution made of
5 mM SDS, 50 mM NaCl, 4 mM Tris pH 7-8, and then dis-
persed in a suspending solution (2 mM SDS, 4 mM Tris pH 7-
8, 50 mM NaCl). Since the droplets ﬂoat, we used a syringe to
remove the buﬀer beneath the droplets. Then, 3 µl (1 mg/ml)
of Texas Red labelled streptavidin (Sigma-Aldrich) per 50 µl
of the droplet solution was added and incubated on rollers for
another hour. Again the droplets were washed twice with the
wash solution and suspended in suspending solution. This
procedure provided oil droplets with approximately the same
streptavidin coverage (∼ 104/µm2) as that on the colloids.

The hybridized DNA constructs with double stranded spac-
ers were grafted onto the oil droplets and the colloids using
the biotin-streptavidin binding [40]. A DNA was added to the
suspension of streptavidin-coated oil droplets in 10x excess.
They were allowed to bind on rollers at a 50 mM NaCl and
2 mM SDS solution. After 4-6 hours the salt concentration
was raised to 100 mM , while maintaining the SDS concentra-
tion. After another 3 hours on the rollers the eppendorf tubes
were allowed to stand vertically so that the oil droplets could
ﬂoat to the top and excess DNA and salt could be removed.
The DNA coated ODs were then washed thrice using the wash
solution and resuspended in the suspending solution.
5 µl of Green ﬂuorescent colloids (D ∼ 0.5 µm, from Mi-
croparticles GmbH) were diluted to 400 µl by adding TE
buﬀer and then sonicated for 30 minutes before adding A’
DNA. 1 M concentrate of the NaCl solution was then added
to this mixture establishing an overall salt concentration of
100 mM . After incubating on the rollers for 4-6 hours more
NaCl solution was added raising the concentration to 300 mM
of NaCl. This was allowed to stay on the rollers for another
4 hours. The colloids were then pelleted using a micro cen-
trifuge, the supernatant was removed and the DNA coated
colloids were then resuspended in fresh TE buﬀer (heated to
40 ◦C). This washing protocol was repeated 4-6 times thus
removing excess DNA and salt present in the system [19, 40].

7

The last two washes were done in TE containing 100 mM
NaCl thereby ensuring steric stability of the DNA brush at-
tached to the colloids.

Finally OD and colloid solutions were mixed and allowed
to bind overnight on rollers — the ﬁnal NaCl concentration
used in all experiments was 50 mM . The desired SDS con-
centration was adjusted at this stage.

Sample chambers

Capillary chambers purchased from CM scientiﬁc (0.2 ×
4 mm ID) were irradiated under a UV lamp for 30 minutes
and then plasma cleaned in an oxygen plasma oven for 2 min-
utes (Diener Elecronics Femto). About 40 µl of the sample
was ﬁlled into the capillary chambers using pipettes and then
sealed and glued onto a glass slide using a two-component
epoxy glue.

Imaging and temperature cycling

For imaging we used a Nikon Ti-E inverted epiﬂuorescence
microscope with either a Nikon Plan Fluor E40x/0.75 dry
objective, or Nikon Plan APO 60x/1.20 water immersion ob-
jective, and a Grasshopper3, Point Grey Research Inc., Sony
IMX174 CMOS sensor CCD camera and a ‘perfect focus sys-
tem’ allowing for long tracking measurements. A blue LED
source (Cree XPEBLU, 485 nm) and white light in combina-
tion with a ﬁlter cube were used to excite the ﬂuorescence on
the colloids and ODs. The sample temperature was controlled
via a computer using a home-made Peltier-stage with a ther-
mocouple. Typical heating and cooing rates were 1 ◦C/min.

Image analysis and diﬀusivity measurements

Image conversion and analysis were done using customised
ImageJ and Matlab routines.
Single particle diﬀusivity
movies were analysed and tracks were generated using the
ANALYSE subroutines of ImageJ. These tracks were sub-
sequently analysed in Matlab generating mean-squared dis-
placements to calculate the diﬀusivities. Several bright-ﬁeld
time series of 1-2 minute durations were recorded and eval-
uated using a Matlab routine for DDM analysis developed
by S. H. Nathan [22, 41]. In DDM, bright ﬁeld (or ﬂuores-
cence) microscope images separated by a given time lag are
subtracted such that only the dynamic information due to
colloid motion remains. Fourier transforming these diﬀerence
images for varying time lags and correlating them provides
the systems relaxation time, τ = (Dq2)−1, as function of the
scattering wavelength q.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

AC acknowledges the ETN-COLLDENSE (H2020-
MCSA- ITN-2014, Grant No. 642774). EE and JB (Bu-
relbach) thank the Winton Program for the Physics of
Sustainability for the Pump Prime Grant and the schol-
arship award respectively. DJ thanks the Udayan Care -
Vcare grant, the Nehru Trust for Cambridge University,
Schlumberger Foundation’s FFTF program and Hughes
Hall - Santander Bursary. ZX thanks the NUDT Scholar-
ship at Cambridge. EE thanks M. Muthukumar for dis-
cussions. AN, DP, and NA acknowledge discussions with
M. Telo da Gama, and ﬁnancial support from the Por-
tuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) -
EXCL/FIS-NAN/0083/2012, UID/FIS/00618/2013, and
IF/00255/2013. JB (Bruijc) thanks the Materials Re-
search Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) pro-
gram of the National Science Foundation under Award
Number DMR-1420073.

∗ ee247@cam.ac.uk
[1] Ramsden W (1903) Separation of Solids in the Surface-
Layers of Solutions and ’Suspensions’ (Observations on
Surface-Membranes, Bubbles, Emulsions, and Mechani-
cal Coagulation) - Preliminary Account. Proc. R. Soc.
London 72:156–164.

[2] Binks BP, Murakami R (2006) Phase inversion of
particle-stabilised materials from foams to dry water.
Nat. Mater. 5:865–869.

[3] Pickering SU (1907) CXCVI Emulsions. J. Chem. Soc.

Trans. 91:2001.

[4] Dinsmore AD, et al. (2002) Colloidosomes: selectively
permeable capsules composed of colloidal particles. Sci-
ence 298:1006–9.

[5] Herzig EM, White KA, Schoﬁeld AB, Poon WCK, Clegg
PS (2007) Bicontinuous emulsions stabilised solely by
colloidal particles. Nat. Mater. 6:966–971.

[6] Lewandowski EP, Bernate JA, Tseng A, Searson PC,
Stebe KJ (2009) Oriented assembly of anisotropic parti-
cles by capillary interactions. Soft Matter 5:886.

[7] Cavallaro M, Botto L, Lewandowski EP, Wang M, Stebe
KJ (2011) From the Cover: Curvature-driven capillary
migration and assembly of rod-like particles. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 108:20923–20928.

[8] Madivala B, Vandebril S, Fransaer J, Vermant J (2009)
Exploiting particle shape in solid stabilised emulsions.
Soft Matter 5:1717.

[9] Mirkin C, Letsinger R, Mucic R, Storhoﬀ J (1996) A
DNA-based method for rationally assembling nanoparti-
cles into macroscopic materials. Nature 382:607–609.

8

[13] Hadorn M, et al. (2012) Speciﬁc and reversible DNA-
directed self-assembly of oil-in-water emulsion droplets.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109:20320–20325.

[14] Parolini L, et al. (2015) Volume and porosity thermal
regulation in lipid mesophases by coupling mobile ligands
to soft membranes. Nat. Commun. 6:5948.

[15] Van der Meulen SAJ, Leunissen ME (2013) Solid colloids
with surface-mobile DNA linkers. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
135:15129–15134.

[16] Feng L, Pontani L, Dreyfus R, Chaikin P, Brujic J (2013)
Speciﬁcity, ﬂexibility and valence of DNA bonds guide
emulsion architecture. Soft Matter 9:9816.

[17] Rossetti FF, et al. (2004) Interaction of Poly(L-Lysine)-
g-Poly(Ethylene Glycol) with Supported Phospholipid
Bilayers. Biophys. J. 87:1711–1721.

[18] Ruiz-Taylor LA, et al. (2001) Monolayers of derivatized
poly(L-lysine)-grafted poly(ethylene glycol) on metal ox-
ides as a class of biomolecular interfaces. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 98:852–857.

[19] Michele LD, et al.

(2014) Eﬀect of Inert Tails on the
Thermodynamics of DNA Hybridization. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 136:6538–6541.

[20] Yanagishima T, Frenkel D, Kotar J, Eiser E (2011) Real-
time monitoring of complex moduli from micro-rheology.
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 23:194118.

[21] Cerbino R, Trappe V (2008) Diﬀerential Dynamic Mi-
croscopy: Probing Wave Vector Dependent Dynamics
with a Microscope. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100:188102.

[22] Eiser E (2014) in Multi Length-Scale Characterisation,
eds Duncan W. Bruce DO, Walton RI (John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.) No. May, pp 233–282.

[23] Buzzaccaro S, Rusconi R, Piazza R (2007) ”Sticky”
Hard Spheres: Equation of State, Phase Diagram, and
Metastable Gels. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99:098301.

[24] Buzzaccaro S, Colombo J, Parola A, Piazza R (2010)

Critical Depletion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105:198301.

[25] Li W, Ma HR (2002) Depletion potential near curved

surfaces. Phys. Rev. E 66:061407.

[26] Michele LD, et al. (2011) Interactions between colloids
induced by a soft cross-linked polymer substrate. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 107:1–4.

[27] Saﬀman PG, Delbruck M (1975) Brownian motion in
biological membranes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 72:3111–
3113.

[28] Fischer TM, Dhar P, Heinig P (2006) The viscous drag
of spheres and ﬁlaments moving in membranes or mono-
layers. J. Fluid Mech. 558:451.

[29] Fuller GG, Vermant J (2012) Complex Fluid-Fluid In-
terfaces: Rheology and Structure. Annu. Rev. Chem.
Biomol. Eng. 3:519–543.

[30] Sickert M, Rondelez F (2003) Shear viscosity of langmuir
monolayers in the low-density limit. Phys. Rev. Lett.
90:126104.

[31] Kawaguchi S, et al. (1997) Aqueous solution properties of
oligo- and poly(ethylene oxide) by static light scattering
and intrinsic viscosity. Polymer (Guildf ). 38:2885–2891.
[32] Oosawa F, Asakura S (1954) Surface Tension of High-

[10] Alivisatos A, Johnsson K, Peng X (1996) Organization

Polymer Solutions. J. Chem. Phys. 22:1255.

of’nanocrystal molecules’ using DNA. Nature 382.

[11] Nykypanchuk D, Maye MM, Van der Lelie D, Gang O
(2008) DNA-guided crystallization of colloidal nanopar-
ticles. Nature 451:549–552.

[12] Geerts N, Eiser E (2010) DNA-functionalized colloids:
Physical properties and applications. Soft Matter 6:4647.

[33] Gast AP, Hall CK, Russel WB (1983) Polymer-induced
phase separations in nonaqueous colloidal suspensions. J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 96:251–267.

[34] Hagen MHJ, Frenkel D (1994) Determination of phase
diagrams for the hard-core attractive Yukawa system. J.
Chem. Phys. 101:4093.

[35] Pusey PN, Pirie AD, Poon WCK (1993) Dynamics of
colloid-polymer mixtures. Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl.
201:322–331.

[36] Iracki TD, Beltran-Villegas DJ, Eichmann SL, Bevan MA
(2010) Charged Micelle Depletion Attraction and Inter-
facial Colloidal Phase Behavior. Langmuir 26:18710–
18717.

[37] Meng G, Paulose J, Nelson DR, Manoharan VN (2014)
Elastic Instability of a Crystal Growing on a Curved Sur-
face. Science (80-. ). 343:634–637.

[38] Marenduzzo D, Finan K, Cook PR (2006) The depletion
attraction: an underappreciated force driving cellular or-

9

ganization. J. Cell Biol. 175:681–686.

[39] Varrato F, et al. (2012) Arrested demixing opens route

to bigels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109:19155–19160.

[40] Michele LD, et al. (2013) Multistep kinetic self-assembly

of DNA-coated colloids. Nat. Commun. 4:2007.

[41] Nathan S (2015) Ph.D. thesis (University of Cambridge).
[42] Ramos L, Fabre P (1997) Swelling of a Lyotropic Hexag-
onal Phase by Monitoring the Radius of the Cylinders.
Langmuir 13:682–686.

