6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Report on the Poblaci´on Flotante of Bogot´a

(D.C.)

Michele Coscia, Frank Neﬀke and Eduardo Lora

CID - Harvard University

March 21, 2016

Abstract

In this document we describe the size of the Poblaci´on Flotante of
Bogot´a (D.C.). The Poblaci´on Flotante is composed by people who live
outside Bogot´a (D.C.), but who rely on the city for performing their job.
We estimate the Poblaci´on Flotante impact relying on a new data source
provided by telecommunications operators in Colombia, which enables us
to estimate how many people commute daily from every municipality of
Colombia to a speciﬁc area of Bogot´a (D.C.). We estimate that the size of
the Poblaci´on Flotante could represent a 5.4% increase of Bogot´a (D.C.)’s
population. During weekdays, the commuters tend to visit the city center
more.

1

Introduction

In this document we aim at describing the size of the Poblaci´on Flotante of
Bogot´a, Distrito Capital (hereafter Bogot´a (D.C.)). Bogot´a (D.C.) is a city of
about 7.4 million inhabitants1. Moreover, many people in municipalities outside
Bogot´a (D.C.) rely on the city for work and use the services oﬀered. Each person
commuting but not residing in Bogot´a (D.C.) is considered part of the Poblaci´on
Flotante of Bogot´a (D.C.). A “commuter” in this document is deﬁned as an
individual who is found more often inside Bogot´a (D.C.) than outside, during
working hours (i.e. 7AM to 8PM). It is thought that the Poblaci´on Flotante
have a large impact on the city, but this impact is diﬃcult to estimate with
reliable data. Classical census information provides only a limited picture.

In this document, we use data obtained from telecommunications operators
in Colombia. The operators shared cellphone metadata with us that enable us to
estimate how many people commute daily from every municipality of Colombia
to a speciﬁc area of Bogot´a (D.C.).

1From census data obtained from the city of Bogot´a (D.C.),

consistent with
http://www.dane.gov.co/files/investigaciones/poblacion/proyepobla06_20/Municipal_
area_1985-2020.xls, retrieved on August 18th, 2015.

1

We ﬁnd that the size of the Poblaci´on Flotante relative to the population of
Bogot´a (D.C.) is limited. From the cellphone data, we observe 43,000 cellphones
regularly commuting to Bogot´a (D.C.) from the nearby municipalities. Using
a rough expansion factor we estimate that the number of commuters is around
400,000, and this represents a 5.4% impact relative to Bogot´a (D.C.)’s popula-
tion. There is a high inhomogeneity in the usage of the city by the Poblaci´on
Flotante from weekdays to weekends. During weekends, the commuting trips
are more likely to happen outside working hours. On the other hand, during
weekdays the trips tend to disproportionately end in the areas of Chapinero
and Santafe. The destinations of the Poblaci´on Flotante are overall scattered
around the entire territory of Bogot´a (D.C.). However, when controlling for na-
tive population, the highest impact of the Poblaci´on Flotante is concentrated on
the two main mobility axes of the city: East-West from the airport to Santafe;
and North-South from Suba and Usaquen to Chapinero.

2 Data Description

The document is based on cellphone call records metadata. The telecommunica-
tions operators shared the metadata of all calls that originated from a cellphone
operating through their networks during a period of six months. The obser-
vation period started in December 1st, 2013 and ended in May 31st, 2014. In
total, for the entire nation of Colombia we around 2 billions observations (with
one observation being a call). The total number of cellphones observed is larger
than 40 millions. The metadata include a variety of attributes for each call: in
this paper we focus on the following subset.

Originator of the call. The telecommunications operators provided us
with the ID of the cellphone originating the call. Note that this ID is encrypted
and anonymized for privacy purposes, rendering the re-identiﬁcation of the in-
dividual impossible. The random IDs in the data are consistent, i.e. the same
cellphone is always assigned to the same random ID.

Phone Tower used. To initiate a call, the originator’s cellphone has to
connect to a cellphone tower. Each cellphone tower is uniquely identiﬁed by an
ID. We are able to cross this ID with a table, connecting the tower ID to the
municipality in which the tower is located. A cellphone cannot be very far from
the tower to which it is connecting. This enables us to pinpoint the position of
the originator at the moment of the call. We detail our methodology in Section
3.

The telecommunications operators which shared the data with us clear on
average around 10 million calls every day, with a clear weekly pattern, depicted
in Figure 1 (left). We can see that the market is pretty stable, without noticeable
long term variations. Cellphone coverage in Colombia is inhomogeneous across
its municipalities, being directly proportional to the municipality population.
Figure 1 (right) reports the number of cellphone towers per inhabitant. The
celltowers increase in a less-than-proportional way: for every 10% increase in
population, there is an 8.5% increase in celltowers.

2

Figure 1: Statistics on Colombia cellphone usage. (Left) Number of calls
(Y axis) per day (X axis) in our dataset. We cover a time window starting
from December 1st, 2013 and ending in May 31st, 2014. The M-shaped pattern
is typical of weekly human activities. Deviations are usually represented by
national holidays and special occasions, such as New Year’s Day. (Right) Num-
ber of cellphone antennas against population for each municipio in Colombia.
Municipios with no antennas are removed from the plot.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: Geolocated information on the city of Bogot´a (D.C.).
(a)
We assign each city block (manzana) to the cellphone tower coverage area. (b)
Population data on Bogot´a (D.C.), from white (sparsely populated block) to red
(densely populated block). Data aggregated at the UPZ level. (c) Productivity
of the establishments located in each block. Productivity is calculated as sum
of revenues in the block over number of employees, from high productivity (red)
to low productivity (white).

3

10720131201201312312014013120140303201404022014050220140531# CallsDay100101102103104103104105106107TowersPopulationBogot´a (D.C.) hosts almost seven thousand phone antennas, and this allows
us to subdivide Bogot´a (D.C.) in smaller areas, which will be used later in
the document for analysis about the destinations of the Poblaci´on Flotante.
Multiple antennas can be hosted in the same towers and thus have the same
coordinates. The total number of towers in Bogot´a (D.C.) is 650, which is
the same number of areas we can deﬁne. Each area has been determined by
assigning a Bogot´a (D.C.) block to the closest tower, with distances calculated
as straight line. Figure 2 (a) reports the resulting Bogot´a (D.C.) areas.

The city of Bogot´a (D.C.) provided us with census and chamber of commerce
information about each block of the city. From the census, we obtain informa-
tion about the population distribution: how many people are registered living
in a particular UPZ. A UPZ is a planning unit, that includes several blocks.
There are around 100 UPZs in Bogot´a (D.C.). Figure 2 (b) reports Bogot´a
(D.C.)’s population map. From the chamber of commerce we can draw the map
of Bogot´a (D.C.)’s productive establishments. In Figure 2 (c), we report the
average productivity of establishments in the block. The average productivity
is calculated as the total revenue of the establishments in the area divided by
the number of people employed.

In the document, we report some statistics about typical commute time for
the Poblaci´on Flotante. The commute times are calculated using the Google
Maps APIs2. The APIs allow us to establish the actual time it takes to drive
from two points in space using the actual road path. We estimate the commute
time from the center of mass of the origin municipality to the center of mass
of Bogot´a (D.C.). The measure provides the average commute time of the
commuters from every origin municipality, rather than evaluating the commute
time of each single commuter.

3 Methodology

The ﬁrst required step is to assign each observed phone to its home location.
This step is necessary because some trips from outside Bogot´a (D.C.) to Bogot´a
(D.C.) might have been originated by people living in Bogot´a (D.C.), unfairly
increasing our estimates. This problem has been well studied in the computer
science literature and we apply here one of the standard solutions [1]. In practice,
we count the number of calls made by each phone connecting to each cell outside
working hours. The cell to which the phone connected the most is the most likely
to be nearby the home location. In our case, since we are simply interested in the
municipality and not in the particular cellphone tower, our estimate is bound
to have smaller error.

The telecommunications operators that shared their data with us do not
have a full market share in Colombia. Since we can only observe their phones,
our calculation will be a severe underestimation. We assume that the sample
is random, i.e. the users not covered by the collaborating operators behave, on
average, like the average observed user. With this assumption, we can estimate

2https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/distancematrix/intro

4

the actual ﬂow from our telecommunications data, deﬁning an expansion factor.
The process we used to estimate the expansion factor is detailed in the following
section.

To generate the mobility network, we keep only IDs which originated and
In this way we can
received at least six calls during the observation period.
drop foreign phones, phones not operating under collaborating operators, and
all special phone numbers that are likely to be not associated with an actual
person (e.g. call centers). It is important to note that, after this cleaning phase,
we do not follow any individual phone number. The networks are aggregated
at the level of the municipality. In the case of the mobility network, we connect
two municipalities if a caller whose home is in a municipality has been observed
in a diﬀerent municipality. This edge creation criterion is a standard already
implemented in several papers creating mobility networks [5, 3, 2]. Figure 3
depicts the resulting mobility network of Colombia. Figure 4 (left) depicts
geographical location of the clusters calculated on the mobility network.

Our last step is to select the municipalities relevant for our analysis. During
the six months of observations we have at least one trip to Bogot´a (D.C.) origi-
nating from every municipality in Colombia. However, this does not mean that
every municipality is part of Bogot´a (D.C.)’s Poblaci´on Flotante. To be part
of this set, the commute time between the municipality city center and Bogot´a
(D.C.) center of mass must be of 180 minutes or less.

One drawback of our methodology is that we cannot describe population
coming from a municipality which does not host a cellphone tower. Some mu-
nicipalities around Bogot´a (D.C.) fall into this category. Figure 4 (right) reports
the cellphone coverage for Bogot´a (D.C.) and we can see that there is no signal
in some of the mountain areas around the city. We believe that this issue has
a small impact on our study for two reason. First, the uncovered municipali-
ties have small population, thus will contribute little to the Poblaci´on Flotante.
Second, the cellphone users from those municipalities would still be captured
as long as they can connect to a tower in a nearby municipality. We would
incorrectly classify their location, but this will help us preserve the accuracy of
our estimate in terms of size.

4 Expansion & Validation

Before being able to use the telecommunications commuting data to analyze the
behavior of the Poblaci´on Flotante we need to make sure that our commuting
estimates are robust. To do so, we focus on the mobility of the inhabitants of
Bogot´a (D.C.), because we have an independent and reliable external dataset
for this. We use the data collected for the Encuesta Movilidad (EM) of 20113.
The EM aims at describing how citizens of Bogot´a (D.C.) move around the city:
which transportation means they use, from where to where they travel and what
is the purpose of their trip.

3http://www.movilidadbogota.gov.co/?pag=954

5

Figure 3: The mobility network of Colombia. Each node in the network is
a Colombian municipality. Municipalities are connected if a signiﬁcant number
of commuting trips are observed ﬂowing from one municipality to the other.
The thickness of the connection is proportional to the number of the commut-
ing trips. The color of the connection is proportional to the signiﬁcance of the
connection, from blue (signiﬁcant) to red (very signiﬁcant). Regardless of the
color, all connections depicted are signiﬁcant with p = 0.01 or lower. Node size
is proportional to the number of municipalities commuting to (in-degree of) the
node. Nodes are colored according to their community, i.e. the group of munic-
ipalities with which they entertain the strongest connections. Communities are
calculated with the Infomap algorithm [4]. We depict the communities on the
Colombia map in Figure 4 (left)

6

Figure 4: Colombia territorial coverages. (Left) A geographical visualiza-
tion of the network clusters computed on the mobility network. Each munic-
ipality area is colored with its corresponding cluster. The color palette is the
same used for Figure 3. (Right) The heatmap represents the signal strength of
the cellphone network across the territory of Colombia. Red areas have a strong
signal, blue areas a weak signal, and uncolored map areas have no signal. Image
courtesy of opensignal.com.

7

Figure 5: Cellphone trips and Encuesta comparison. The number of
commuting trips according to the elecommunications data analyzed (x axis)
against the number of commuting trips estimated by the Encuesta Movilidad
(y axis) for each pair of localidades in Bogot´a (D.C.).

The data collected by the EM is at the level of Bogot´a (D.C.)’s Unidades
de Planeamiento Zonal (UPZs), which are a more coarse aggregation than our
tower-based division. We aggregate both the UPZs and our subdivision to a
higher hierarchical level, the 20 localities (localidades) of Bogot´a (D.C.). After
this aggregation step, we obtain for EM a 20×20 matrix where each cell reports
the number of commuters ﬂowing across a speciﬁc location pair.

We reconstruct a corresponding matrix also for our observations. We aggre-
gate telecommunication commuting patterns at the UPZ level and we expand
this estimate using population data. For each UPZ, say U P Z1, we estimate the
number of phones living in the area: cU P Z1. From EM, we know how many
people are resident in the UPZ: pU P Z1. The observed trips going from U P Z1
to another UPZ (U P Z2) are expanded as follows:

TU P Z1→U P Z2 = tU P Z1→U P Z2 × pU P Z1
cU P Z1

,

In practice, we calculate an estimated observed market penetration in U P Z1
and we use the estimate to weight tU P Z1−→U P Z2, which is the raw number of
observed phones commuting. We use the same expansion technique for munici-
palities, substituting municipalities m1 and m2 where appropriate. For munici-
palities, the population data comes from the National Statistics Department of
Colombia (DANE).

We can now compare the UPZ commuting matrices calculated using EM
and telecommunication data. Figure 5 depicts the relationship between the EM
and our estimate. Every observation is a locality pair. In this plot, we expect
to ﬁnd a β slope of 1, that is we expect that each mover observation in phone
data represents a mover in the EM. However, in our case β ∼ 0.75. A potential
explanation for this is measurement error.

We progressively remove the observations involving the smallest localities,
which would have the most noisy mobility estimations. We sort locality pairs
N1N2 value, where Nx is the number of phones residing
according to their

√

8

103104105106107102103104105106EncuestaOur EstimateFigure 6: β estimation with progressive noise reduction.
(Left) The
evolution of the β slope coeﬃcient for the log-log regression between EM and
our estimate, with standard error of the estimate.
(Right) The evolution of
the β coeﬃcients for the OLS. The two estimates (blue and red) determine the
interval of the actual expansion factor.

in locality x. We ﬁrst remove the locality pair with the smallest
N1N2 value
and we proceed in ascending order. We then recompute the slope of the log-
log regression. If the mismatch is due to measurement error, it is likely that
there is more error among the smallest places, thus we expect β to progressively
approach 1 the more noisy connections we remove. Figure 6(left) depicts the
evolution of the β values. Our theory is conﬁrmed, as β reaches 1 when we
consider only the strongest, and arguably least noisy, connections.

√

From the log-log regression, we obtain an intercept higher than 1, meaning
that our expanded estimate is an underestimation of the actual ﬂows. To conﬁrm
this expansion factor, we perform two OLS regressions:

EM = α + βT C,

T C = α + βEM.

First we estimate a linear model predicting EM with telecommunication
estimate (T C), then we take the inverse of the linear model predicting the
telecommunication estimate with EM. If the problem is measurement error, the
real expansion factor should lie between the two β estimates of these models.
We again perform the OLS estimations progressively reducing noisy connections.
Figure 6(left) depicts the interval of our estimation. We can see that the interval
narrows down as noise decrease, spanning from 1.35 to 1.4. Hereafter, we decide
to use the middle point, and our estimates are expanded by a factor of 1.35.

5 Totals

Using the methodology described in the previous section, we are now able to
provide the overall estimates of the Poblaci´on Flotante size. According to our

9

 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05 1.1 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400Log-Log β# Observations 1.2 1.25 1.3 1.35 1.4 1.45 1.5 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400Lin-Lin β# ObservationsFigure 7: Commuting relationships with Bogot´a (D.C.). (Left) Day of the
week averages of our commuter estimates. (Right) Number of commuters from
the neighboring municipalities of Bogot´a (D.C.) (highlighted in blue). Darker
municipalities contribute most of the commuters. Note that some neighboring
municipalities contribute no commuter. That is because those municipalities
are not covered by cellphone signal (see Figure 4).

Figure 8: Trip duration distribution. The estimated trip duration from the
center of the origin municipality to the center of Bogot´a (D.C.).

estimate, on every given day on average fewer than 43,000 observed phones com-
mute to Bogot´a (D.C.). The 43,000 phones are commuting from 89 Colombian
municipalities. In Section 7 we provide more information about the diﬀerent
origins. Using our expansion factor, we estimate that the Poblaci´on Flotante
counts more than 400,000 people, and that it increases the population of Bogot´a
(D.C.) during the day by ∼5.4%.

The average number of commuters is subject to periodic ﬂuctuations. Dur-
ing the weekend the number of commuters to Bogot´a (D.C.) decreases by one
third. Figure 7(left) depicts the weekly pattern in number of commuters during
our observation window. During weekdays, the average number of estimated
commuters is 450,000, and it goes down to less than 300,000 during weekends.
Using data from Google Maps API we evaluate the duration of typical com-
mute trips from the center of a municipality to the center of Bogot´a (D.C.).

10

 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000 350000 400000 450000 500000MondayTuesdayWednesdayThursdayFridaySaturdaySundayAvg CommutersWeek Day 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100Duration (mins)% TripsDay Type Total Working Hour Leisure Night
0.10
Weekend
0.09
Weekday
Overall
0.09

0.74
1.10
1.00

1.68
1.71
1.71

0.34
0.25
0.27

Table 1: The normalized share of trips in each time slot. First we divide
all trips according to the day in which they are performed (column “Total”).
Then, out of each subset of trips we report the normalized share of trips hap-
pening in each of the three time slots deﬁned in the text.

Figure 8 reports the results. For 50% of all trips, our estimate of average com-
mute time is 51 minutes. The average commute times touches the hour mark
only when we include the farther municipalities. We can conclude that the
typical commute time to Bogot´a (D.C.) is less than one hour.

6 Time Slot Analysis

We deﬁne three diﬀerent time slots and classify the trips accordingly. The three
time slots are: “Working Hour”, between 7AM and 8PM; “Leisure”, between
8PM and 12AM; and “Night” between 12AM and 7AM. We also keep trace of
the day of the week in which each trip is performed: either during a weekday
(from Monday to Friday) or during the weekend (Saturday and Sunday). Table
1 reports the normalized share of trips divided in the diﬀerent time slots. The
share is normalized assuming an equal distribution of trips at all hours of the
day and for any day of the week. For instance, if trips are equally distributed,
we expect to have 28.5% (2 out of 7) of them in the weekend. Since we observe
21.25% of trips during the weekend, in Table 1 we report 21.25 / 28.5 = 0.74.
Most of the trips happen during weekdays (> 1), suggesting that the primary
aim of the Poblaci´on Flotante is to work or use the services in Bogot´a (D.C.)
rather than visiting the city for pleasure. When breaking down trips in time
zones we can conﬁrm this conclusion. A trip made during the leisure or the
night time slot is more likely to be performed during the weekend (normalized
share of 0.34 vs 0.25).

d ), where twe
d

Figure 9 depicts the diﬀerence in destinations inside Bogot´a (D.C.) from
weekdays to weekends. The color of each city block is proportional to ∆td =
d ) − log(twd
log(twe
is the number of trips ending in block d dur-
ing weekends and twd
is the number of trips at the same destination d during
weekdays. From the ﬁgure, we can observe that the locations of Chapinero and
Santafe are visited disproportionately more during weekdays, displayed in dark
red. During weekends, more trips end in the outskirts of Bogot´a (D.C.) than in
these two locations.

d

11

Figure 9: Weekday vs weekend map. The diﬀerence in destinations from
weekdays to weekend. Dark red areas are visited in proportion more during
weekdays than during weekends.

Municipio
Soacha
Chia
Villavicencio
Funza
Mosquera
Zipaquira
Facatativa
Madrid
La Calera
Cajica
Total

# Commuters % Inﬂux Median Duration
43 min.
61 min.
165 min.
62 min.
62 min.
69 min.
74 min.
63 min.
102 min.
78 min.
51 min.

32.93%
9.21%
5.05%
4.28%
4.17%
3.91%
3.35%
2.97%
2.85%
2.60%
100.00%

133,462
37,326
20,448
17,346
16,897
15,850
13,560
12,021
11,539
10,543
405,293

Table 2: Top origins. The ten municipalities contributing the most to the
Poblaci´on Flotante of Bogot´a (D.C.). For each municipality we report the av-
erage number of observed commuting phones, the share over all commuters and
the estimated duration of the trip.

12

Figure 10: Share of people commuting a given distance. For each distance
interval, we count the total number of commuters originating from a munici-
pality inside the distance interval and we normalize the count by the combined
population of these municipalities.

7 Origins

In this section we turn our attention to the municipalities from which the
Poblaci´on Flotante originate. Table 2 reports the top ten municipalities of
origin. Our estimation suggests that a single municipality, Soacha, is responsi-
ble for almost a third of the regular commuters to Bogot´a (D.C.). More than
130,000 commuters on average travel every day from Soacha. Most of the other
municipalities present in the list are located in the Cundinamarca department,
with the exception of Villavicencio, which is the capital of a department bor-
dering with Cundinamarca (Meta) and thus we expect it to be a larger center
gravitating around Bogot´a (D.C.)’s sphere of inﬂuence.

We already reported a median travel time of 51 minutes for all commuters.
We can see that this is heavily inﬂuenced by the connection between Soacha and
Bogot´a (D.C.), whose city centers can be connected in 43 minutes by car. The
commute time is higher for the further away municipalities, also in this case led
by the capitals of further away departments.

We compare our results with the literature about working commutes. In [6]
authors study the share of population commuting to work in Germany. They
found that around 50% of the people commute less than 10km, 30% commute
between 10km and 25km, 15% commute between 25km and 50km and 5% com-
mute more than 50km. We calculate the corresponding shares in Colombia,
using road distance from the municipality of origin to Bogot´a (D.C.).

Figure 10 depicts the result, where we count the number of commuters over
the population of the municipality. We cannot calculate the share for the short-
est commute, because Bogot´a (D.C.)’s sides are longer than 10km, making us
unable to study shorter commutes. However, for the other distance bins we
obtain comparable results: almost 25% commute in the 10-25km interval, less
than 20% commuting in the 25-50km interval, and around 6% commuting more
than 50km.

13

 0 5 10 15 20 2510-2525-5050+% CommutersKMFigure 11: Destinations of the Poblaci´on Flotante. Each UPZ in Bogot´a
(D.C.) is colored according to the average daily inﬂux of commuters from outside
the city. Dark red UPZs host a high traﬃc of commuters, while white UPZs are
scarcely used.

8 Destinations

To estimate the impact of the Poblaci´on Flotante on the city it is important
to analyze their ﬁnal destinations. If the commuters target all areas of the city
equally their impact is very diﬀerent than the one they could have if they target
speciﬁc areas. The ﬁrst step is to visualize the most popular destinations in
Bogot´a (D.C.). Figure 11 depicts the most popular destinations in red. Figure
11 (right) reports the result. The two main mobility axes of the city host most
of the dark red areas: the East-West strip from the airport to Santafe; and the
North-South strip from Suba and Usaquen to Chapinero. This means that these
axes attract more members of the Poblaci´on Flotante compared to the people
actually living in the area. In the dark red areas, using our expansion factor, we
estimate a commuter over native population ratio of around 0.17, which would
imply that the commuters would be a sixth of the registered Bogot´a (D.C.)
residents in the area.

Using our data, we are able to draw maps describing how diﬀerent munici-
palities use the city diﬀerently. We provide two examples of the many possible.
Figure 12 reports them. The ﬁrst one, Figure 12(left), shows the commuter
destinations from Chia: popular Chia’s destinations are in dark red, while non
visited municipalities are in white. We can see that there is a clear range eﬀect.
Chia is a municipality bordering Bogot´a (D.C.) on the North, and this is where
most of Chia commuters stop.

We can see a similar eﬀect in Figure 12(right), this time showing the destina-

14

Figure 12: Diﬀerent destinations in Bogot´a (D.C.) from commuters in
diﬀerent municipalities. (Left) Destinations of commuters coming from Chia,
from high traﬃc areas (dark red) to low traﬃc (white). (Right) Destinations of
commuters coming from Fusagasuga, with the same color map.

tions of commuters from Fusagasuga, with an identical color map. Fusagasuga
is located on the West side. Commuters from Fusagasuga seems to favor the
west side of the city, when compared to Chia’s destinations.

Using the data from the chamber of commerce, we are able to know the exact
city block location of each registered productive establishment in Bogot´a (D.C.).
This allows us to connect the commuting trips to Bogot´a (D.C.) to speciﬁc
industries. Hereafter, we assume that a commuter will visit an establishment
present in the city block at random, proportionally to the establishment’s size
in number of employees.

Table 3 reports the top 10 industries of destination during leisure time of
weekends. To better highlight the weekdays patterns, we perform several oper-
ations. First, we ban from the report the industries that appear in the top 10
according to the previous ranking. Second, we sort each industry using as score
the following formula: W E2/W D, where W E is the number of commuters in the
weekend and W D is the number of commuters in the weekday. With this score,
we discount for the regular weekday activity, while still penalizing the industries
that are not visited much neither during weekends nor during weekdays.

As expected, the vast majority of industries in the top 10 is a commercial

activity, with bars and pubs ranking in second place.

15

Industry Description
4330

Terminacion Y Acabado De Ediﬁcios Y Obras De Ingenieria Civil
Expendio De Bebidas Alcoholicas Para El Consumo Dentro Del
Establecimiento
Comercio Al Por Menor En Establecimientos No Especializados
Con Surtido Compuesto Principalmente Por Alimentos, Bebidas
O Tabaco
Comercio Al Por Menor De Computadores, Equipos Perifericos,
Programas De Informatica Y Equipos De Telecomunicaciones En
Establecimientos Especializados
Comercio Al Por Menor De Prendas De Vestir Y Sus Accesorios
(Incluye Articulos De Piel) En Establecimientos Especializados
Confeccion De Prendas De Vestir, Excepto Prendas De Piel
Comercio Al Por Menor De Articulos De Ferreteria, Pinturas Y
Productos De Vidrio En Establecimientos Especializados
Actividades De Otras Asociaciones N.C.P.
Comercio Al Por Menor De Carnes (Incluye Aves De Corral),
Productos Carnicos, Pescados Y Productos De Mar, En Establec-
imientos Especializados
Construccion De Ediﬁcios Residenciales

5630

4711

4741

4771

1410

4752

9499

4723

4111

Table 3: Top 10 industry of destination during leisure time of weekends that
are not in the top 10 in weekdays.

Acknowledgements

We thank the city of Bogot´a (D.C.) for sharing with us the data about pop-
ulation and productive activities in the city, and the shapeﬁles used for the
ﬁgures in the document. We thank the telecommunications operators for mak-
ing the data available to us, and opensignal.com for allowing us to use one of
their maps. We thank Marta C. Gonzales, Serdar Collack, Jameson Toole and
Bradley Sturt for their help in gathering, cleaning and hosting the telecommu-
nications data. The Committee on the Use of Human Subjects at the authors’
aﬃliation institution approved the usage of the data made in this paper, certi-
fying that the rights of all subjects whose data have been examined in the study
have not been violated.

References

[1] Lauren Alexander, Shan Jiang, Mikel Murga, and Marta C Gonz´alez.
Origin–destination trips by purpose and time of day inferred from mobile
phone data. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 2015.

[2] Michele Coscia, Salvatore Rinzivillo, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi.
Optimal spatial resolution for the analysis of human mobility. In Advances

16

in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 2012 IEEE/ACM In-
ternational Conference on, pages 248–252. IEEE, 2012.

[3] Carlo Ratti, Stanislav Sobolevsky, Francesco Calabrese, Clio Andris,
Jonathan Reades, Mauro Martino, Rob Claxton, and Steven H Strogatz.
Redrawing the map of great britain from a network of human interactions.
PloS one, 5(12):e14248, 2010.

[4] Martin Rosvall and Carl T Bergstrom. Multilevel compression of random
walks on networks reveals hierarchical organization in large integrated sys-
tems. PloS one, 6(4):e18209, 2011.

[5] Christian Thiemann, Fabian Theis, Daniel Grady, Rafael Brune, and Dirk
Brockmann. The structure of borders in a small world. PloS one,
5(11):e15422, 2010.

[6] Ulrike Winkelmann.

desl¨andervergleich.
4(2010):40–43, 2010.

manche pendeln weit –berufspendler im bun-
Statistisches Monatsheft Baden-W¨urttemberg,

17

