6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
6
8
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Green’s function approach to edge states in transition metal dichalcogenides

Mojtaba Farmanbar, Taher Amlaki, and Geert Brocks

Faculty of Science and Technology and MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology,
University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands

(Dated: March 22, 2016)

The semiconducting two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides MX2 show an abundance
of one-dimensional metallic edges and grain boundaries. Standard techniques for calculating edge
states typically model nanoribbons, and require the use of supercells. In this paper we formulate
a Green’s function technique for calculating edge states of (semi-)inﬁnite two-dimensional systems
with a single well-deﬁned edge or grain boundary. We express Green’s functions in terms of Bloch
matrices, constructed from the solutions of a quadratic eigenvalue equation. The technique can
be applied to any localized basis representation of the Hamiltonian. Here we use it to calculate
edge states of MX2 monolayers by means of tight-binding models. Besides the basic zigzag and
armchair edges, we study edges with a more general orientation, structurally modifed edges, and
grain boundaries. A simple three-band model captures an important part of the edge electronic
structures. An eleven-band model comprising all valence orbitals of the M and X atoms, is required
to obtain all edge states with energies in the MX2 band gap. Here states of odd symmetry with
respect to a mirror plane through the layer of M atoms have a dangling-bond character, and tend
to pin the Fermi level.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the wake of graphene a whole new class has emerged
of materials that are essentially two-dimensional (2D) in
nature.1,2 The subset of materials with honeycomb-like
structures alone contains metals such as graphene, insu-
lators such as boron nitride (h-BN), and semiconductors
such as the transition metal dichalcogenides (MX2; M
= Mo,W, X = S,Se,Te).3,4 It becomes more and more
feasible to grow nanostructures and in-plane heterostruc-
tures of 2D materials in a controlled way.5–11 As a result
the electronic structure of edges and grain boundaries
attracts increasing attention.

Graphene edges, for instance, are predicted to have
remarkable one-dimensional electronic and magnetic
properties.12,13 The edges and grain boundaries of MX2
sheets are generally metallic.10,14–20 As the bulk 2D MX2
materials are semiconducting, the metallicity is truly lo-
calized at the edge or grain boundary, where one could
see manifestations of the peculiar spectral and transport
properties of one-dimensional (1D) metals.21 In chem-
istry MoS2 edges have been identiﬁed as sites that show
a special catalytic activity.14,16,22 Such experimental de-
velopments have motivated a large number of calcula-
tions on the electronic structure of edge states, both ﬁrst-
principles calculations, as well as model calculations.

The electronic structure of graphene edges in partic-
ular have been studied extensively. As graphene has a
relatively simple electronic structure, some features of
the edge states in graphene can be studied by analytical
or simple numerical techniques.23–25 The edges of MoS2
have attracted renewed attention recently.14–20,26–34 Here
the complexity of the electronic structure requires more
extensive calculations, even for relatively simple model-
ing at the tight-binding level. A standard technique for
calculating edge states uses supercells to model nanorib-
bons of a ﬁnite width. Drawbacks of this approach are

that the electronic structure of the edge states is mixed
with that of the bulk-like interior of the nanoribbon, and
that the two edges of the nanoribbon can interact elec-
tronically. The ribbon has therefore to be suﬃciently
wide in order to electronically separate the two edges
from one another and from the bulk.
It may require
the use of large supercells, which in particular if the ma-
terials are modeled from ﬁrst principles, leads to time-
consuming calculations and complicates analysis of the
results.

Green’s function techniques constitute an alternative
approach. They enable calculations on semi-inﬁnite
structures with a single well-deﬁned edge, or on inﬁ-
nite structures containing a single grain boundary, and
they generally do not require the use of large supercells.
Green’s function techniques have been pioneered for cal-
culations on surface states of 3D materials.35–39 Here we
formulate a special Green’s function technique for calcu-
lating edge and grain boundary states. This technique is
inspired by the Green’s function formalism that has been
introduced for calculating electronic transport through
nanostructures.40–44

We express both edge Green’s functions and bulk
Green’s functions in terms of Bloch matrices, which are
constructed from the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of a
quadratic eigenvalue problem.40–45 Structural and chem-
ical modiﬁcations at the edges and grain boundaries are
then tackled by connecting the modiﬁed edges to semi-
inﬁnite bulk structures. The method allows for a clean
separation of edge and bulk properties at a moderate
computational cost.

Our Green’s function approach requires a representa-
tion of the Hamiltonian on a localized basis, such as
atomic orbitals or Wannier functions, or a real space
grid. It can be applied to tight-binding, as well as ﬁrst-
principles models. In this paper we illustrate its use on
tight-binding models for MX2 monolayers, MoS2 in par-

ticular. We apply the approach to the three-band model
for the simpliﬁed electronic structure of MoS2, developed
by Mattheis46 and Liu et al..47 We study the electronic
structures of the elementary (zigzag, armchair) MoS2
edges, and of edges of a more general orientation. We
illustrate the eﬀect on the electronic structure of edge
modiﬁcations and of the formation of grain boundaries.
For comparison we also study edges within an eleven-
band model comprising all MoS2 valence orbitals, devel-
oped by Cappelluti et al..48

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II A we for-
mulate the technique of calculating Green’s functions us-
ing Bloch matrices. How to apply this technique to MX2
edges and grain boundaries is described in Sec. II B. The
tight-binding models are discussed in Sec. II C, and ap-
pendices A and B. We discuss results obtained with these
models for MX2 edges and grain boundaries in Secs. III A
and III B.

II. THEORY

A. Green’s functions

a < k ≤ π

We divide the 2D layers into 1D strips, see Fig. 1.37
Assuming translational symmetry with period a along
the strip, the Hamiltonian matrix can be labeled by a
Bloch wave number − π
a . For clarity of notation
we suppress the label k in the following. The thickness of
the strips is chosen such that a direct interaction exists
between neighboring strips only. We label the strips by
an index i, and divide the Hamiltonian matrix into blocks
Hi,j, with an i, j = −∞, . . . ,∞ for an iniﬁnite system.
Having only nearest neighbor interactions between strips
means that the Hamiltonian matrix is block tridiagonal,
i.e., Hi,j = 0; j (cid:54)= i, i ± 1. For a unit cell in the strip
containing N orbitals, all these matrix blocks are N × N .
The columns of the retarded Green’s function matrix

blocks Gi,j obey

−Hi,i−1Gi−1,j+(cid:0)E+I − Hi,i

(cid:1) Gi,j−Hi,i+1Gi+1,j = Iδij,

(1)
where I is the N × N identity matrix, and E+ = E + iη
with η the usual inﬁnitesimal positive real number. Note
that we assume a representation based upon an orthog-
onal basis set. We are foremost interested in the layer
resolved density of states, given by the usual expression
ni = −π−1ImTrGi,i. Obviously, besides on the Bloch
wave number k, the Green’s function matrix also depends
on the energy E. Again for ease of notation we often omit
both these labels in the following.

In an inﬁnite system with translational symmetry be-
tween the layers, the strips are identical, and Eq. 1 be-
comes

− BGi−1,j +(cid:0)E+I − H(cid:1) Gi,j − B†Gi+1,j = Iδij,

(2)
with B = Hi,i−1, H = Hi,i, and B† = Hi,i+1 for i =
−∞, . . . ,∞, see Fig. 1. For a left semi-inﬁnite system

2

FIG. 1. (Color online) A 2D layer is divided in 1D strips.
Translation symmetry along the strips gives the Bloch wave
number k. Translation symmetry between the strips results in
identical on-strip Hamiltonian matrix blocks H(k) and hop-
ping matrix blocks B(k).

with i = −∞ to i = 0, the equations remain the same,
except for the i = 0 equation, which becomes

− BGL−1,j +(cid:0)E+I − H(cid:1) GL

0,j = Iδ0j.

(3)

In surface science the matrix block gL = GL
0,0 is called
the surface Green’s function. In the context of 2D struc-
tures we call it the edge Green’s function.
In a similar way, for a right semi-inﬁnite system with
i = 0,∞, only the equation for i = 0 is diﬀerent from the
bulk equation, Eq. 2

(cid:0)E+I − H(cid:1) GR

0,j − B†GR

1,j = Iδ0j,

(4)

with the matrix block gR = GR
0,0 the edge Green’s func-
tion. Note that if the 2D layer has no two-fold symmetry,
such as inversion, a mirror plane perpendicular to the 2D
layer, or a two-fold rotation axis perpendicular to the 2D
layer, then gR (cid:54)= gL, i.e., a right edge is diﬀerent from a
left edge.

The density of states of the edge strip of a left/right

semi-inﬁnite system is given by

N(cid:88)

nα; nα = −π−1Im(cid:2)gL/R

(cid:3)

n(S)
L/R =

α,α ,

(5)

α=1

where nα is the density of states projected on a single
orbital α.

Partitioning the inﬁnite system into a right and a
left semi-inﬁnite halve, the on-strip matrix blocks of the
Green’s function of the inﬁnite system can be expressed
as

Gi,i =(cid:2)g−1

L − B†gRB(cid:3)−1

.

(6)

1. Eigenmodes and Bloch matrices

We will express the Green’s function matrices of
(semi)inﬁnite systems in terms of Bloch matrices.40

3
where Λ± are the N± × N± diagonal matrices with the
eigenvalues λ±
(pseudo)inverses of U±.53 The Bloch matrices have the

n on the diagonal, and (cid:101)U± are the N± × N

convenient property(cid:0)F±(cid:1)p
for any integer p, as (cid:101)U±U± = IM± , the M± × M± iden-
ci =(cid:0)F+(cid:1)i

= U±(cid:0)Λ±(cid:1)p (cid:101)U±,
0 +(cid:0)F−(cid:1)i

tity matrix, with M± ≤ N±. It follows that

c−
0 ,

(14)

(13)

c+

satisﬁes the tight-binding equation, Eq. 7, where c±
0 set
the boundary conditions in strip number 0. We assume
that all relevant solutions can be expressed this way.

2. Green’s functions in terms of Bloch matrices

The general expression of Eq. 14 also applies to the
columns of the Green’s function matrices, compare Eqs. 2
and 7. The boundary conditions require that a retarded
Green’s function comprises traveling waves moving out-
wards from its point source and/or evanescent waves de-
caying away from the source. For left and right semi-
inﬁnite systems this gives

Using Eq. 15 in Eqs. 2 and 3 then leads to

(cid:104)−B(cid:0)F−(cid:1)−1
(cid:104)−B(cid:0)F−(cid:1)−1

GL

GR

gL, i < 0,

gR, i > 0.

i,0 =(cid:0)F−(cid:1)i
i,0 =(cid:0)F+(cid:1)i
(cid:105)
+ E+I − H − B†F−(cid:105)(cid:0)F−(cid:1)−1
gL =(cid:2)B†F−(cid:3)−1

+ E+I − H

gL = I,

,

(cid:104)

gR =

B(cid:0)F+(cid:1)−1(cid:105)−1
Gi,i =(cid:2)B†F− − B†F+(cid:3)−1

.

(15)

(16)

(17)

gL = 0.

(18)

(19)

Equation 2 for i (cid:54)= j is the same as the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion in tight-binding representation

− Bci−1 + (EI − H) ci − B†ci+1 = 0,

(7)

where ci is the N -dimensional vector of orbital coeﬃ-
cients of the wave function on strip i. With translational
symmetry between the strips, the elementary solution is
a Bloch wave, and ci+1 = λci, with λ a complex con-
stant. For an iniﬁnite system this holds for all i, and for
a left (right) semi-inﬁnite system for i < 0 (i > 0). Us-
ing this relation as an ansatz in Eq. 7 gives a quadratic
eigenvalue equation in λ of dimension N .

A(λ)u = 0; A(λ) = −B + λ (EI − H) − λ2B†.

(8)
As A(λ) = λ2A†(1/λ∗), if λ is a root of det A(λ), then so
is 1/λ∗. Numerically, the solutions are usually found by
solving an equivalent linear generalized eigenvalue equa-
tion of dimension 2N ,45

(cid:19)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18) 0 I

B† 0

I

0
EI − H −B

− λ

z = 0,

(9)

(cid:20)(cid:18)

which resembles the eigenvalue equation for the transfer
matrix.37,38,49–52

The maximally 2N solutions of this equation can be
divided into two classes, i.e. right-going modes and left-
going modes, labeled respectively by + and − super-
scripts in the following. Right-going modes are either
evanescent waves that decay to the right, |λ+
n| < 1, or
n| = 1 and a
waves that travel to the right, meaning |λ+
positive group velocity. Left-going modes either decay to
n | = 1 with neg-
the left, |λ−
ative group velocity. With un the eigenvector belonging
to the eigenvalue λn in Eq. 9, the group velocity is given
by42

n | > 1, or travel to the left, |λ−

 Im(cid:2)λnu†

nB†un

(cid:3) ,

vn = − 2a

n and a set of N− left-going modes u−

Only for traveling waves is the group velocity non-zero.
We divide the eigenvectors into a set of N + right-going
modes u+
n . The
evanescent waves always come in pairs of a right-going
and a left-going mode, i.e., if λ+
n is the eigenvalue of a
right-going mode, then λ−
n )∗ gives a left-going
solution. Traveling waves do not necessarily come in such
pairs, and the numbers of right- and left-going travel-
ing waves may be diﬀerent. Neither right-going modes
or left-going modes necessarily form a complete set in
N -dimensional space, nor are they an orthogonal set in
general.
N × N± matrices

One can use these two sets of modes to form the two

n = 1/(λ+

U± =(cid:0)u±
1 , . . . , u±
N±
F± = U±Λ±(cid:101)U±,
and construct the two Bloch matrices

1 , u±

(cid:1) ,

(10)

Solving these two equations gives the edge Green’s func-
tion of a left semi-inﬁnite system as

where the inversion should be treated as a pseudoinver-
sion if B† is singular.53 Using Eq. 16 in Eqs. 2 and 4 gives
the edge Green’s function of a right semi-inﬁnite system

Finally, using Eq. 6 gives the on-strip Green’s function
matrix block of an inﬁnite system

.

(20)

(11)

(12)

3.

Ideal edge states

One cannot have traveling Bloch waves for energies in
the band gap of a semiconductor. In semi-inﬁte systems
one can however have solutions in the form of evanescent

4

FIG. 3. (Color online) Left semi-inﬁnite system with a modi-
ﬁed edge. H(k) and B(k) are the matrix blocks of the unper-
turbed system; H(cid:48)(k) and B(cid:48)(k) are the matrix blocks of the
perturbed edge strip.

L and gI

trix blocks gI
R pertaining to the two strips just
left and right of the grain boundary interface can be de-
rived like Eq. 6

(cid:104)
(cid:104)

gRB(cid:48)(cid:105)−1
R − B(cid:48)gLB(cid:48)†(cid:105)−1

L − B(cid:48)†
g−1
g−1

gI
L =

gI
R =

,

,

(21)

(22)

where gL and gR are the edge Green functions of the
left and right semi-inﬁnite systems, respectively. With
Eqs. 18 and 19 one can express the interface Green’s func-
tions in terms of Bloch matrices
L − B(cid:48)(BR(F+
R)−1 − B(cid:48)(BLF−

R)−1)−1B(cid:48)†(cid:105)−1
L )−1B(cid:48)†(cid:105)−1

†
LF−
B

BR(F+

gI
R =

gI
L =

(cid:104)
(cid:104)

,

.

(23)

(24)

5. Modiﬁed edges

So far we have assumed that all layers are identical
right up to an edge or grain boundary. The formation of
an edge or boundary often involves an electronic and a
structural reconstruction, which makes the Hamiltonian
matrix blocks of the strips adjacent to an edge or grain
boundary diﬀerent from those of the bulk strips.

We illustrate this on a left semi-inﬁnite system with
an edge layer (i = 0) that is diﬀerent from the bulk. The
tight-binding equations for the two layers closest to the
edge are

− Bc−2 + (EI − H) c−1 − B(cid:48)†

c0 = 0
−B(cid:48)c−1 + (EI − H(cid:48)) c0 = 0,

(25)
(cid:54)= H is the on-site Hamiltonian of the edge
where H(cid:48)
layer, and B(cid:48) (cid:54)= B is the coupling of this layer to the rest
of the system, see Fig. 3. Using c−2 = (F−)−1c−1, see

FIG. 2.
(Color online) Grain boundary between a left
semi-inﬁnite system with on-strip Hamiltonian matrix blocks
HL(k) and hopping matrix blocks BL(k) and a right semi-
inﬁnite system with matrix blocks HR(k) and BR(k). The
coupling between left and right parts is given by the hopping
matrix block B(cid:48)(k).

states that originate from the edge of the system. One
can ﬁnd the energies of these edge states from the edge
Green’s functions, Eqs. 18 and 19, which have isolated
poles at these energies. Obviously in numerical calcula-
tions one has to work at complex energies E + iη to avoid
these poles, but η can be chosen small.

Alternatively, edge states can be obtained from the so-
lutions of the eigenvalue problem, Eq. 8, solved at real
energies E.37,51,54,55 As edge states should decay away
from the edge, only the u−
n modes can contribute to an
edge state for a left semi-inﬁnite system, and only the
u+
n modes for a right semi-inﬁnite system. An edge state
of a left semi-inﬁnite system has amplitude zero beyond
the edge of that system, i.e., c1 = F−c−
0 = 0 (Eq. 14).
This means rank(F−) < N−, the number of left-going
solutions of Eq. 8. Because rank(F−) = rank(U−), see

Eq. 12 with rank(Λ−) = N− and rank(U−) = rank((cid:101)U−),

a necessary and suﬃcient condition for the existence
of an edge state is that the eigenmodes u−
n are lin-
early dependent. A similar reasoning holds for the edge
states of a right semi-inﬁnite system. The number of
edge states at a particular energy E and wave number
k of a left/right semi-inﬁnite system is then given by
edge = N−/+ − rank(U−/+).
N L/R

4.

Ideal grain boundaries

A model for an ideal grain boundary is shown in Fig. 2.
Space is divided into two parts with B(cid:48) the hopping ma-
trix block connecting the left and right halves. We as-
sume that the on-strip Hamiltonian matrix blocks of all
the strips in the left half are given by HL right up to the
boundary, and that the hopping matrix blocks between
all nearest neighbor strips in the left part are given by
BL. The corresponding matrix blocks for the right half
are HR and BR, respectively. The Green’s function ma-

(cid:18)

Eqs. 14 and 15, transforms Eq. 25 into

EI − H − B(F−)−1 −B(cid:48)†
EI − H(cid:48)

−B(cid:48)

(cid:19)(cid:18) c−1

c0

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 0

0

(cid:19)

.

=

(26)
In the terminology used in non-equilibrium Green’s func-
tion (NEGF) transport calculations, the term ΣL(E) ≡
B(F−)−1 is called the self-energy of the left lead.42 The
Green’s function matrix blocks pertaining to the two lay-
ers closest to the edge are then given by
EI − H − B(F−)−1 −B(cid:48)†
EI − H(cid:48)

(cid:19)−1

−B(cid:48)

GL =

(cid:18)

(27)

.

The Green’s function gives the density of states in the
usual way, cf. Eq. 5. The density of states is zero for
energies inside the band gap, except for isolated poles
at particular energies, which represent the edge states of
the modiﬁed edges. This formalism can be adapted in
an obvious way to model modiﬁed edges of right semi-
inﬁnite systems, or grain boundaries where the strips left
and right of the interface are modiﬁed.

6. Charge neutrality level

Experimentally the Fermi level in MX2 compounds
is often determined by unintentional doping due to
defects.56–58 In addition, as MX2 compounds are polar
materials, an internal electric ﬁeld is created if a crys-
tallite is terminated by polar edges.59,60 Such an electric
ﬁeld can cause a long range charge transfer between dif-
ferent edges, even if the bulk material does not contain
any impurities. The position of the Fermi level can then
become dependent on the size and the shape of the sam-
ple, which makes the intrinsic Fermi level an ill-deﬁned
quantity.

Each edge or grain boundary has a well-deﬁned energy
level at which that edge or grain boundary is electrically
neutral, the charge neutrality level (CNL). We use the
CNL as a reference point in the following. The charge
neutrality level ECNL is deﬁned as the energy at which

N (ECNL) = Nstrip,

(28)

where Nstrip is the number of electrons that makes the
strip neutral, and N (E) is the electron counting function

N (E) =

n(E(cid:48))dE(cid:48),

(29)

with n(E) is the k-integrated density of states

5

B. MX2 edges

The hexagonal lattice of MX2 is shown in Fig. 4. We
specify an edge starting from a supercell spanned by vec-
tors T1 and T2. This supercell is used to deﬁne a semi-
inﬁnite system, choosing one of the vectors as the trans-
lation vector parallel to the edge.

1. Zigzag and armchair edges

Similar to graphene the basic-type edges of the MX2
lattice are the zigzag and armchair edges as deﬁned in
Fig. 4. A zigzag edge is deﬁned by T1 = a1 and T2 = a2,
with T2 as the vector parallel to the edge. The matrix
blocks discussed in section II A become

H = H0,0 + H0,1ei2πk + H0,−1e−i2πk,
B = H−1,0 + H−1,−1e−i2πk,

(31)

(32)

where Hp,q denotes the real space Hamiltonian matrix
block that describes the interaction between atoms in
the unit cell situated at the origin and atoms in the unit
cell situated at pa1 + qa2. The matrix elements of Hp,q
depend on the speciﬁc tight-binding model that is used
to represent the electronic structure of MX2. They are
given in the appendices.

Note that by solving the quadratic eigenvalue equa-
tion, Eqs. 8 and 9, one has simultaneous access to the
Green’s functions of the edges of a right and a left semi-
inﬁnite system via Eqs. 18 and 19. Unlike graphene the
MX2 monolayer lacks inversion symmetry, which means
that the zigzag edge termination of a right semi-inﬁnite
system is diﬀerent from that of a left semi-inﬁnite sys-
tem, see Fig. 4. The zigzag edge of a right semi-inﬁnite
system is terminated by metal atoms. We call this the
M-edge, consistent with previous studies on MoS2, where
it is called the Mo-edge.14–16 The zigzag edge of a left
semi-inﬁnite system is then called the X-edge, as it is
terminated by chalcogen atoms. In previous studies on
MoS2, it has been called the S-edge.

An edge in armchair orientationcan be constructed
from T1 = 2a1 + a2 and T2 = a2 with T1 the translation
vector parallel to the edge, see Fig. 4. The corresponding
supercell is twice as large as the unit cell, so the dimen-
sion of the matrix blocks deﬁning the edge are twice the
dimension of the blocks deﬁning the zigzag edge.
H1,1 + H−1,0e−i2πk

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

H0,0

H =

H1,0ei2πk + H−1,−1

(cid:18) H0,−1 H1,0 + H−1,−1e−i2πk

H0,0

(cid:19)

,

(33)

.

(34)

(cid:90) E

−∞

(cid:90) π

a

− π

a

n(E) =

a
2π

n(E, k)dk.

(30)

B =

0

H0,−1

The k-resolved density of states n(E, k) can be obtained
from Eq. 5 for edge strips, and a similar expression for a
bulk strip.

Note that the termination at the edge is controlled by the
contents of the cell used to deﬁne the primitive vectors
a1, a2. In particular, the cell deﬁned in Fig. 4 does not
lead to a pristine armchair edge, but one with additional

6

FIG. 5. (Color online) Left: generalized zigzag edge parallel
to T1 = 3(a1 + a2) + (2a1 + a2). Right: generalized armchair
edge parallel to T1 = (a1 + a2) + 2(2a1 + a2).

0

H−1,0e−i2πk

H1,1
H−1,−1 H0,0

H1,1
H−1,−1 H0,0

0

H−1,−1

0

H1,1
H0,0

blocks for m = 2, n = 1 are

0

 H0,0
 H0−1 H1,0

H1,0ei2πk

H =

B =

0 H−1,−1e−i2πk

0 H0,−1 H1,0
0 H0,−1
0
0
0

0

0

H1,0
H0,−1

 ,

(37)

(38)

 .

To generate edges with an orientation closer to the
armchair edge (θ = 90o) one can use the series with
m = 1 and vary n. The translation vector parallel to
the edge is then the sum of one zigzag vector and n arm-
chair vectors, which we call a generalized armchair edge,
see Fig. 5. The supercell then contains 2n + 1 unit cells.
As an example, m = 1, n = 3 gives θ = 85.3o. The edge
termination can be controlled by adding and removing
atoms at the edge, and apply the technique outlined in
Sec. II A 5.

FIG. 4. (Color online) Top view of the MX2 lattice with M
and X atoms in purple and yellow, respectively. The lattice
vectors a1 and a2 are indicated by arrows. The M and X
zigzag edges runs parallel to a2 and are the edges of right and
left semi-inﬁnite systems, respectively. The armchair edge
runs parallel to 2a1 + a2.

M or X atoms attached to the edge. It is straightforward
to remove these atoms and by applying the technique
outlined in Sec. II A 5 obtain the electronic structure of
a pristine armchair edge.

2. General edges

Edges with a somewhat more general orientation are

deﬁned by the supercell

T1 = m (a1 + a2) + n (2a1 + a2) ; T2 = a2,

(35)

with T1 the translation vector parallel to the edge, de-
ﬁned as m zigzag vectors plus n armchair vectors, see
Fig. 5. The angle with the direction of a2 is given by

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

θ = arccos

√

1
2 m

m2 + 3mn + 3n2

.

(36)

C. Tight-binding models

Because of the symmetry of the lattice one only has to
cover the 30o angle between a zigzag orientation m =
1, n = 0, θ = 60o, and an armchair orientation m =
0, n = 1, θ = 90o. Left and right edges (M-type and
X-type edges) are then obtained by using T2 = a2 and
T2 = −a2, respectively.

A series of edge orientations is obtained by setting
n = 1 and varying m, where the translation vector along
the edge is the sum of m zigzag vectors and one armchair
vector. We call this a generalized zigzag edge, see Fig. 5.
The supercell deﬁned by the lattice vectors, Eq. 35, con-
tains m + 2 unit cells. For instance, values m = 1, 2
give angles θ = 79.1o, 70.9o, respectively. The construc-
tion of the Hamiltonian matrix blocks deﬁning the edge is
straightforward. As an example, the Hamiltonian matrix

We consider tight-binding models with spin degener-
acy, i.e., we neglect spin-orbit coupling. The main con-
tributions to the valence and conduction bands of MX2
around the band gap come from the valence d-shell of the
M atom and the p-shell of the X atoms. A minimal basis
set then comprises eleven orbitals: ﬁve metal d-orbitals,
and six p-orbitals of the two chalcogen atoms.48 Mono-
layer MX2 has D3h point-group symmetry. The trigonal
prismatic coordination of the metal atom splits the d -
(cid:48){dxy, dx2−y2},
states into three groups: A
(cid:48)(cid:48){dxz, dyz}. The six p-orbitals of the two chalcogen
and E
z = pz(X1) − pz(X2)},
1{p−
atoms split into the groups A
(cid:48){p+
y = py(X1) + py(X2)},
E
2{p+
x = px(X1) −
(cid:48)(cid:48)
A
y = py(X1) − py(X2)}. Mirror symmetry in
px(X2), p−

x = px(X1) + px(X2), p+
z = pz(X1) + pz(X2)} and E

1{d3z2−r2}, E

(cid:48)(cid:48){p−

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

z , p−

x , and p−

z , p+

orbitals.

(cid:48)
1 and E
(cid:48)(cid:48)
2 and E

the plane of the metal atoms, σh, allows for hybridiza-
tion between orbitals that are even with respect to σh,
i.e., A
orbitals, or between orbitals that are odd,
(cid:48)(cid:48)
i.e., A
The set of orbitals with even symmetry thus comprises
the six orbitals d3z2−r2 , dxy, dx2−y2, p−
x , and p+
y ,
and the set with odd symmetry the ﬁve orbitals dxz,
dyz, p+
y . As the even/odd symmetry is con-
served for the edges and grain boundaries considered in
this paper, all corresponding Hamiltonian matrices are
blocked, and the even/odd solutions can be obtained sep-
arately. The matrix blocks Hp,q required for construct-
ing the Hamiltonian matrices of Sec. II B, are given in
appendix B. The values of the tight-binding parameters
have been obtained by ﬁtting the bulk band structure
to bands obtained from density functional theory (DFT)
calculations with the generalized gradient approximation
(GGA/PBE) functional.61 For the even states we use the
parameters given by Rostami et al.,62 and for the odd
states we use the parameters given in appendix B.

The eleven band model can be simpliﬁed further. From
early theoretical studies and recent ﬁrst-principles calcu-
lations one observes that the MX2 bands at the top of
the valence band and at the bottom of the conduction
band, are dominated by the metal d -orbitals, in partic-
ular those with even symmetry, i.e., d3z2−r2, dxy, and
dx2−y2.46,48,63 Contributions to the bands around the gap
from the dxz and dyz orbitals and from the chalcogen
p-orbitals are much smaller. Matheiss has constructed
an eﬀective tight-binding model for MX2, where only the
metal sites are taken into account explicitly.46 These sites
form a two-dimensional triangular lattice, and the pres-
ence of the X atoms lowers the symmetry of this lattice
from D6h to D3h. The metal orbitals with even symme-
try, d3z2−r2 , dxy, and dx2−y2, are used to construct an
eﬀective three-band model. The matrix blocks Hp,q of
this model are given in appendix A. We use the param-
eters given by Liu et al.,47 which have been obtained by
ﬁtting the bulk bands to GGA/PBE results.

III. RESULTS

A. Three-band model

1. Zigzag and armchair edges

The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of Eq. 8, are used to
construct the Bloch matrices, Eq. 12. The bulk density
of states n(k, E) is shown in Fig. 6(a), as calculated from
the Green’s function matrix of a bulk strip, Eqs. 2 and 20,
in the zigzag edge orientation. In the three-band model,
the lowest band is the valence band, and the overlapping
two upper bands form the conduction band. Note that
the zero of energy is chosen at the top of the valence band.
The same Bloch matrices give access to the Green’s func-
tion matrices of the zigzag edge strips, Eqs. 18 and 19.
Here gR(k, E) and gL(k, E) are the energy and k-resolved

7

Green’s function of the M-edge and the X-edge, respec-
tively, see Fig. 4. Again using MoS2 as an example, the
associated densities of state nR(k, E) and nL(k, E) of the
Mo-edge, respectively the S-edge, are shown in Fig. 6(b)
and (c).

The Mo-edge has a prominent edge state inside the
bulk band gap dispersing upwards from k = 0 to k =
1
2 . The S-edge has an edge state that starts in the bulk
conduction band at k = 0, and disperses downward to
k = 1
2 . In surface physics such states are termed Shockley
states.64 These edge states are also found in the more
detailed eleven-band model with a similar dispersion, see
Sec. III B. The latter model shows a richer edge state
structure, originating from bands that are omitted in the
simple three-band model. Nevertheless, the three-band
model ﬁnds prominent Mo-edge and the S-edge states
with the correct dispersion. Edge states are also found
at energies close to ∼ 3 eV, which is in the hybridization
gap between the two conduction bands.

The structure of a bulk strip in armchair orientation
has a mirror plane perpendicular to the MX2-plane and
along the armchair orientation, see see Fig. 4.
It fol-
lows that the densities of states of right and left edges,
nR(k, E) and nL(k, E), are identical for the armchair ori-
entation. The k-resolved density of states of the MoS2
armchair edge, Eq. 33-34, is shown in Fig. 6(d). There
are two clear edge states with energies in the band gap.
One edge state is just below the conduction band and
roughly follows the dispersion of the conduction band
edge, whereas the other one is positioned at ∼ 0.5 eV
above the valence band, following the dispersion of va-
lence band edge.

The k-integrated densities of states, Eq. 30, of a bulk
MoS2 strip in zigzag orientation, the Mo-edge, the S-
edge, and the armchair edge, are given in Figs. 6(e)-(h),
respectively. These densities of states show the van Hove
singularities at the band edges that are typical of 1D
structures. With the zero of energy at the top of the
valence band, the bulk valence band lies in the energy
range −0.5-0.0 eV, and the two conduction bands in the
range 1.6-3.5 eV, see Fig. 6(e). The Mo-edge shows edge
bands in the energy range 0.1-1.4 eV, and around 3 eV.
The S-edge has an edge band starting at 0.5 eV, which
merges with the conduction band at higher energies, and
additional edge states with energies 2.7-3.0 eV. The arm-
chair edge has two edge band in the gap at in the energy
ranges 0.3-0.6 eV and 1.4-2.0 eV, respectively, and an
edge state around 3.1 eV.

Also shown in Figs. 6(e)-(h) are the electron counting
function (red curves), Eq. 29, and the charge neutrality
level (CNL; green lines), Eq. 28. Obviously for the bulk
the CNL is at the top of the valence band, see Fig. 6(e).
The position of the CNL at the Mo-edge corresponds to a
2/3 ﬁlled edge band in the gap, see Fig. 6(f). One might
interpret this as eﬀectively two-third of the bonds being
broken for a Mo atom at the Mo-edge. Likewise, the
position of the CNL at the S-edge corresponds to a 1/3
ﬁlled edge band in the gap, see Fig. 6(g). This correlates

8

FIG. 6. (Color online) (a) k-resolved density of states (DoS) per MoS2 unit of bulk MoS2 in the three-band tight-binding
model, with the k-vector parallel to the zigzag edge, and the zero of energy at the top of the valence band. The DoS is plotted
on a logarithmic scale (right-hand side n denotes amplitude 10−n) using a broadening parameter η = 0.05 eV (Eq. 1). (b), (c),
(d) k-resolved DoSs of the Mo-edge, the S-edge, and the armchair edge, respectively. (e),(f),(g),(h) k-integrated DoS per MoS2
unit of bulk MoS2, the Mo-edge, the S-edge, and the armchair edge, all plotted on a linear scale (η = 0.05 eV). The red solid
lines give the counting function and the green dashed lines indicate the charge neutrality level (CNL), Eqs. 28-30.

with one-third of the bonds being broken for a Mo atom
at the S-edge. The supercell of the armchair edge has two
Mo atoms along the edge, where the local environments
of one is similar to that of a Mo atom at an Mo-edge,
and the local environment of the other is similar to that
of a Mo atom at the S-edge, see Fig. 4. Summing the 2/3
and 1/3 edge state occupations at the Mo- and S-edges,
one predicts that the armchair edge has one completely
ﬁlled edge band. The calculated CNL shows that this is
indeed the case; the armchair edge has one fully occupied
edge band, and one empty edge band, see see Fig. 6(h).

The CNLs of all three basic edges are quite close, cf.
Figs. 6(f)-(h). This is an artefact of the three-band
model, and of disregarding the odd bands in particu-
lar. The latter play an important role in setting the
CNLs in MX2 edges, as we will discuss in Sec III B. In
polar lattices such as MX2 the CNL does not ﬁx the
intrinsic Fermi level, unlike in a non-polar lattice such
as graphene.59,60 In a ﬁnite-sized MX2 sample electrons
can be redistributed among all the edges in the sample,
driven by the internal electric ﬁeld set up by the intrinsic
polarization of the material.

So far we have focused on edges of MoS2, but all MX2
compounds with a similar structure (D3h point group,
trigonal prismatic coordination of M atoms by X atoms)

have similar edge structures. Figure 7 shows the densities
of states of the W and Te zigzag edges of H-WTe2 as an
example. These densities of states are very similar to
those of the corresponding Mo- and S-edges of MoS2, see
Figs. 6(b), (c), (f) and (g). The band gap of bulk WTe2
is somewhat smaller than that of MoS2, and the band
widths are somewhat larger. WTe2 has a band gap of 1.1
eV (GGA/PBE), a valence band in the range −0.7-0.0
eV, and conduction bands in the range 1.1-3.7 eV. The
W-edge has a state in the gap in the energy range 0.0-1.4
eV, and the Te-edge has a state in the gap in the range
0.5-2.0 eV. As is the case for the bulk bands, the band
widths of these edge states are somewhat larger than the
corresponding states in MoS2.

2. General edges and grain boundaries

The electronic structure of the more general edges de-
ﬁned in Sec. II B 2 can be calculated along the same lines.
Figs. 8(a) and (b) give the densities of states of general-
ized zigzag edges of MoS2 with translation vectors along
the edge deﬁned by m = 1 and 3, respectively, and n = 1,
see Eq. 35 and Fig. 5. The generalized zigzag edge has
a rich structure of edge states within the bulk band gap.

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)kkkkE(eV)9

FIG. 7. (Color online) (a),(b) k-resolved DoSs of the W-edge
and the Te-edge within the three band tight-binding model
of H-WTe2. (c),(d) k-integrated DoSs of the W-edge and the
Te-edge. The same conventions and parameters are used as
in Fig. 6.

FIG. 8. (Color online) k-integrated DoSs of the generalized
zigzag edges deﬁned by Eq. 35 with (a) m = 1, n = 1 and (b)
m = 3, n = 1, and of the generalized armchair edges with (c)
m = 1, n = 2 and (d) m = 1, n = 3.

The peak at 0.4 eV in Figs. 8(a) and (b) results from the
armchair part of this edge, compare to Fig. 6(h). The
band in the range 1-1.5 eV in 8(a), and the structure of
bands in the range 0.8-1.9 eV in 8(b) originates mainly
from the zigzag parts.

The counting system for the three-band model, as out-
lined in the previous section, gives a ﬁlling 2/3 per Mo
atom at a Mo-edge and a ﬁlling 1 per two Mo atoms
at an armchair edge. For a generalized zigzag edge one
would then predict the CNL to correspond to 2m/3 + n
ﬁlled edge states. This would mean that the CNL is in-
side an edge band, unless m is a multiple of three. This
is conﬁrmed by a calculation of the CNL according to
Eq. 28. In Fig. 6(a), where m = 1, the position of the
CNL corresponds to a 2/3-ﬁlled edge band, whereas in
Fig. 6(b), where m = 3, the CNL is in a gap between
two edge states. The gaps between the edge states of the
general edges are quite small however. In a sample that
involves long range charge transfer between the edges, as
discussed above, these semiconducting edges easily be-
come doped.

Figures 8(c)and (d) show the densities of states of gen-
eralized armchair edges of MoS2, with translation vectors
along the edge with m = 1 and n = 2 and 3, respectively,
see Eq. 35 and Fig. 5. Again this general edge has a rich
structure of states within the bulk band gap. In partic-
ular the peaks around 0.4 eV and 1.7 eV have a strong
armchair character. The counting model gives 1/3 + n
ﬁlled edge states, so it predicts that the CNL always lies
inside an edge band. Calculations of the CNL according

to Eq. 28 conﬁrm this, as shown in Fig. 8(c) and (d). In
conclusion, within the three-band tight-binding model,
pristine charge neutral edges are metallic for most edge
orientations.

A similar analysis can be applied to the states found
at grain boundaries. We illustrate the use of Eq. 21 for
calculating the states at grain boundaries using a simple
grain boundary in MoS2. It consists of a left semi-inﬁnite
part, terminated by a S-edge, connected to a right semi-
inﬁnite part, terminated by a Mo-edge. As hopping ma-
trix deﬁning the coupling between left and right parts,
Fig. 2, we choose a scaled version of the bulk hopping
matrix, Eq. 32.

B(cid:48) = αB; 0 ≤ α ≤ 1.

(39)

Obviously α = 0 gives two uncoupled S- and Mo-edges
with corresponding edge states, Figs. 6(b), (c), (f) and
(g), whereas α = 1 gives the bulk electronic structure,
Figs. 6(a) and (e), without any edge states. The values
0 < α < 1 then represent a simple model for a weak link
with zigzag orientation.

Figure 9(a) gives the k-resolved density of states for
α = 0.2, which represents a relatively weak coupling be-
tween the left and right parts. In the band gap one ob-
serves the two edge bands that are typical of the Mo-
edge and the S-edge, see Figs. 6(b) and (c). Due to
the coupling between the S- and Mo-edges at the grain
boundary, the two bands interact, which results in an
avoided crossing between the two edge states at k ≈ 0.35
and E ≈ 1 eV. The avoided crossing creates an energy

-101234E(eV)012345DoS(eV-1)-101234E(eV)012345(a)(b)(c)(d)kkE(eV)-101234E(eV)012345DoS(eV-1)-101234E(eV)012345024E(eV)012345-101234E(eV)012345DoS(eV-1)024E(eV)012345024E(eV)012345-101234E(eV)012345DoS(eV-1)024E(eV)012345024E(eV)012345-101234E(eV)012345DoS(eV-1)(a)(b)(c)(d)10

FIG. 9. (Color online) (a) k-resolved DoS of a model grain
boundary between a Mo-edge and a S-edge, with a coupling
between the edges α = 0.2, Eq. 32. (b) k-resolved DoS with
α = 0.8. (c),(d) the corresponding k-integrated DoSs.

FIG. 10. (Color online) (a,c) k-resolved and k-integrated DoS
of a Mo-edge with a 3× reconstruction, where the on-site
energy of every third Mo-atom is 1 eV lower than that of the
other two; (b,d) the same information for the S-edge.

gap in the range 0.7-1.2 eV, which is clearly visible in
the k-integrated density of states for α = 0.2, shown in
Fig. 9(c). The counting model predicts 2/3, respectively
1/3 ﬁlling per Mo atom of an edge state at the Mo-edge
and the S-edge, if the grain boundary is charge neutral.
This implies that the lower edge band is fully occupied,
whereas the upper edge band is empty. A calculation of
the CNL according to Eq. 28 conﬁrms this, see Fig. 9(c).
Figure 9(b) gives the k-resolved density of states for a
strong coupling between the left and right parts, α = 0.8.
The interaction between the two edge bands is now much
stronger than for the case discussed in the previous para-
graph, which results in a much larger gap in the range
0.2-1.6 eV, see Fig. 9(d). The two edge bands are pushed
toward the valence band and the conduction band, re-
spectively, and they more closely follow the dispersions
of the valence and conduction band edges. The occu-
pancy of a charge neutral grain boundary is the same
as before, i.e., a fully occupied lower edge band and an
empty upper edge band.

As a ﬁnal point in this section we illustrate the tech-
nique introduced in Sec. II A 5 for handling edges that
involve an electronic or a structural reconstruction. For
the zigzag edges we have found a 2/3 respectively a 1/3
occupied edge band for the Mo-edge and the S-edge. It
suggests that a reconstruction that triples the transla-
tional period along the edge, may lead to fully occupied
edge states for both edges. As a proof of principle, we
test a very simple reconstruction, where one in three Mo
atoms at the Mo-edge or the S-edge has a diﬀerent on-

site energy. The Green’s function matrix is calculated
from Eq. 25. The densities of states of the modiﬁed edge
layers are shown in Fig. 10(a) and (c) for the Mo-edge
and (b) and (d) for the S-edge. Obviously increasing the
periodicity from 1× to 3× folds the edge band, so one
observes three edge states instead of one. Decreasing the
on-site energy of every third Mo atom at the edge by 1
eV introduces energy gaps between the edge states.

By calculating the CNL we observe that at the Mo-
edge the two lowest edge bands, starting at 0.4 eV and
0.7 eV in Fig. 10(b) and (d), are ﬁlled, whereas the third
band, starting at 1.1 eV, is empty. The lowest edge
band of the S-edge at 0.0 eV, Fig. 10(a) and (c), is ﬁlled,
whereas the two upper bands, starting at 0.9 eV and 1.6
eV, respectively, are empty.

B. Eleven-band tight-binding model

As discussed in Sec. II C, the eleven-band tight-binding
model of MX2 uses a basis set composed of the ﬁve va-
lence d-orbitals of the M atom, and the six valence p or-
bitals of the two X atoms. Because mirror symmetry σh
in the MX2 plane holds both for monolayers as well as for
edges, states that are even or odd with respect this mirror
symmetry are treated separately. The even symmetry set
comprises the six orbitals d3z2−r2 , dxy, dx2−y2, p−
z , p+
x ,
and p+
y , and the odd symmetry set the ﬁve orbitals dxz,
z , p−
dyz, p+
y , leading to six- and ﬁve-dimensional
Hamiltonian matrices, respectively.

x , and p−

-101234E(eV)0123DoS(eV-1)-101234E(eV)0123kkE(eV)(a)(b)(c)(d)11

FIG. 11. (Color online) As Fig. 6 but for the states within the eleven band model with even symmetry with respect to a
mirror plane through the plane of the Mo atoms. (a),(b),(c),(d) k-resolved DoS per MoS2 unit of bulk MoS2, the Mo-edge, the
S-edge, and the armchair edge, respectively. (e),(f),(g),(h) The corresponding k-integrated DoSs of bulk MoS2, the Mo-edge,
the S-edge, and the armchair edge. The same conventions and parameters are used as in Fig. 6.

Again we use MoS2 as an example of a MX2 monolayer.
The procedure for obtaining the Green’s functions and
the densities of states are the same as those described in
the previous section. In the following we will only discuss
the results obtained for the basic edges, the zigzag and
the armchair edges, and compare those to the results
obtained with the three-band model.

1. Even bands

The k-resolved density of states of the even states of
a bulk strip in the zigzag edge orientation is shown in
Fig. 11(a) in an energy region around the band gap, and
the corresponding k-integrated density of states is given
in Fig. 11(e). As before, the zero of energy is positioned
at the top of the valence band. Qualitatively, these densi-
ties of states are similar to those of the three-band model,
compare to Figs. 6(a) and (e). Quantitatively, the eleven-
band model gives a highest valence band that is wider by
∼ 0.3 eV, whereas the two lowest conduction bands are
narrower by ∼ 0.5 eV in total.

Figures 11(b) and (f) show the k-resolved and k-
integrated densities of states of the Mo-edge. There are
two prominent edge bands with energies in the MoS2
band gap. One edge band emerges from the bulk valence
band at k ≈ 0.3, and disperses upward with increasing
k to 1 eV. A second band disperses downward from the

conduction band to 1.6 eV. The ﬁrst edge band is also
found in the three-band model, compare Figs. 6(b) and
(f).
In the three-band model it is found at a slightly
higher energy, such that it is completely isolated from
the bulk valence band. The second edge band is absent
in the three-band model. We will discuss the character of
these bands in more detail below. Like in the three-band
model, there are also edge states at other energies, for in-
stance just below the highest valence band at ∼ −1.1 eV,
and in the hybridization gaps of the conduction bands.

The k-resolved and k-integrated densities of states of
the S-edge are given in Figs. 11(c) and (g). At ener-
gies in the MoS2 band gap there is one prominent edge
state, which starts at k = 0 in the conduction band,
and disperses downward with increasing k to 0.7 eV. The
three-band model shows the same edge state with more or
less the same dispersion, compare to Figs. 6(c) and (g).
In the eleven-band model this state is somewhat more
prominently isolated from the conduction band. Unlike
for the Mo-edge, the eleven-band model does not give ad-
ditional even edge states for the S-edge in the band gap,
as compared to the three-band model.

Finally, Figs. 11(d) and (h) show the k-resolved and k-
integrated densities of states of the armchair edge. There
are three edge bands with energies in the MoS2 band gap.
One band is situated at −0.1-0.5 eV and a second edge
band lies at 0.9-1.5 eV. These two edge bands roughly
correspond to the ones that are found in the three-band

-10123E(eV)01234DoS(eV-1)-10123E(eV)01234-10123E(eV)0123-10123E(eV)0123(a)(b)(e)(f)(g)(h)E(eV)kkkk(c)(d)12

(Color online) Projected densities of states (PDoS) calculated according to Eq. 5.

(a),(b),(c) For the Mo-edge,
FIG. 12.
projected on the Mo d3z2−r2 orbital, the dxy and dx2−y2 orbitals, and the p orbitals of the S atoms, respectively. (d),(e),(f)
The same information for the S-edge. The PDoSs are calculated using a broadening parameter η = 0.1 eV, Eq. 1, and are
plotted with a linear grayscale.

model of the armchair edge, see Figs. 6(d) and (h). In the
eleven-band model these two edge bands are found at a
slightly lower energy in the gap. In addition the present
model ﬁnds a third edge band in the gap, just below the
conduction band at 1.7-1.9 eV.

sent in the three-band model, pin the CNLs of the Mo-
edge and the S-edge, and make these edges metallic. The
CNL at the armchair edge is in the gap between the two
edge bands, see Fig. 11(h), as it also is in the three-band
model, see Fig. 6(h)

In conclusion, although there are quantitative diﬀer-
ences between the electronic structures found with the
eleven-band model and the three-band model, qualita-
tively they give similar results concerning the prominent
edge states of even symmetry found in the MoS2 band
gap. For the Mo-edge and the armchair edge, the eleven-
band model gives an additional edge state, as compared
to the three-band model, with energies just below the
conduction band.

Figures 11(e)-(h) also show the CNLs. One needs of
course all the bands to calculate the CNLs, including
the odd bands to be discussed in the next section. A
comparison to Fig. 6 reveals that the odd bands are in
fact instrumental in ﬁxing the CNLs. For instance, the
CNLs of the Mo-edge and the S-edge diﬀer by 1.4 eV,
Figs. 11(f) and (g), whereas the corresponding CNLs in
Figs. 6(f) and (g) diﬀer by 0.3 eV only. The eleven-band
model gives one completely occupied even edge band for
the Mo-edge and one empty one, see Fig. 11(f). For the
S-edge it gives one completely empty even edge band,
see Fig. 11(g). This is unlike the the three-band model,
where we found partially ﬁlled even edge bands, both
for the Mo-edge and the S-edge. As we will see in the
next section, edge states of odd symmetry, which are ab-

The orbital character of the edge states can be ana-
lyzed using the projected density of states, according to
Eq. 5. The projections on the Mo d3z2−r2 orbital, the dxy
and dx2−y2 orbitals, and the p orbitals of the S atoms are
given in Figs. 12(a), (b), and (c), respectively, for the
Mo-edge. The results indicate that both edge states in
the MoS2 band gap have a mixed Mo and S character.
The dominant Mo contributions clearly come from the
dxy and dx2−y2 orbitals. The upper edge state has S p
character mixed in, in particular for k < 0.4, whereas
the lower edge state has some S p character mixed in for
k > 0.4. There is little d3z2−r2 character mixed in these
edge bands, except at the band edges.

The projected densities of states of the S-edge, pro-
jected on the same orbitals, are given in Figs. 12(d), (e),
and (f). Also here the edge state in the MoS2 band gap
has a mixed Mo and S character. As for the Mo contri-
bution, for k = 0 the dominant character is Mo dxy and
dx2−y2. That changes somewhat for larger k; at k = 0.5
the dominant character is Mo d3z2−r2. The contribution
of the S-orbitals is fairly constant throughout the whole
edge band.

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)d3z2-r2dx2-y2,dxypx,py, pzd3z2-r2dx2-y2,dxypx,py, pz13

FIG. 13. (Color online) As Fig. 11, but for the states with odd symmetry with respect to a mirror plane through the plane of
the Mo atoms.

2. Odd bands

The k-resolved and k-integrated bulk densities of states
n(k, E) corresponding to the odd states are given in
Figs. 13(a) and (e). The band gap between the odd states
is 3.3 eV, which is signiﬁcantly larger than the gap be-
tween the even states. The top of the highest valence
band of the odd states is approximately 0.8 eV below
the top of the highest valence band of the even states,
whereas the bottom of the lowest conduction band of the
odd states is approximately 0.6 eV above that of the even
states.

The k-resolved densities of state of the odd bands are
shown in Figs. 13(b) and (c) for the Mo-edge and of the
S-edge, respectively, and the corresponding k-integrated
densities of states are shown in Figs. 13(f) and (g). Both
edges have a prominent edge band with moderate dis-
persion inside the gap between the odd states. The edge
band of the Mo-edge lies close to the conduction band
between 1.3 and 1.8 eV, whereas the edge band of the
S-edge is close to the top of the valence band between
−0.5 and 0.2 eV.

If we also take the bulk band structure of the even
bands into consideration, Figs. 11(a) and (d), then most
of the edge band at the S-edge, Figs. 13(c) and (g) over-
laps with the valence band. It is still a true edge state
though, because the interaction between the odd edge
state and the even bulk bands is symmetry forbidden.
The edge band at the Mo-edge, Figs. 13(b) and (f) par-

tially overlaps with the conduction band of the even
states. Also this is a true edge state over the whole 1D
Brillouin zone, as interaction with the bulk states is sym-
metry forbidden.

Figures 13(d) and (h) give the k-resolved and k-
integrated densities of states corresponding to the arm-
chair edge. These results show two edge bands in the
gap region with a modest to small dispersion. The low-
est of these edge bands has a dispersion of 0.4 eV, and
taking also the even bulk bands into consideration, it lies
in the MoS2 valence band. The upper edge band is near
dispersionless; it is found in the gap at 1.6 eV.

The calculated CNLs are also given in Figs. 13(e)-(h).
From these ﬁgures it becomes clear that the odd edge
states are instrumental in controlling the CNLs of the
edges. The CNL of the Mo-edge is found in the edge band
that is close to the MoS2 conduction band, see Fig. 13(f),
and the CNL of the S-edge lies in the edge band close
to the MoS2 valence band, see Fig. 13(g). Within the
eleven-band model both these edges are metallic in their
charge neutral state. The CNL of the armchair edge lies
between the two edge bands, Fig. 13(h), which means
that the neutral armchair edge is semiconducting.

The orbital character of the odd symmetry edge states
is identiﬁed using the projected densities of state. Fig-
ures 14(a) and (b) show the projections on the d- and
p-orbitals of the density of states of the Mo-edge, and
Figs. 14(c) and (d) show the projections for the S-edge.
The edge state at the Mo-edge has somewhat of a mixed

(a)(b)(e)(f)(g)(h)E(eV)(c)(d)kkkk14

plicates identifying the properties of single edges.

In this paper we formulate a Green’s function tech-
nique for calculating edge states of (semi-)inﬁnite 2D sys-
tems with a single well-deﬁned edge or grain boundary.
We express bulk, edge and boundary Green’s functions
in terms of Bloch matrices. The latter are constructed
from the solutions of a quadratic eigenvalue equation,
which gives the traveling and evanescent Bloch states of
the system. Electronic and structural reconstructions of
edges or grain boundaries are easily incorporated in the
technique. The formalism can be implemented in any
localized basis set representation of the Hamiltonian.

Here we use it to calculate edge and grain bound-
ary states of MX2 monolayers by means of tight-binding
models. A simple three-band model is employed to ex-
plore the electronic structures of the basic pristine zigzag
and armchair edges in MX2. Within this model the
zigzag edges are metallic in their charge neutral state,
whereas the armchair edge is semiconducting. The three-
band model is also used to analyze the electronic struc-
tures of MoS2 edges with a more general orientation be-
tween zigzag and armchair; these edges are generally
metallic. The same model is applied to obtain electronic
structures of grain boundaries and of structurally mod-
ifed edges.

The three-band model captures only part of MX2 edge
electronic structure. A more complete picture of the rich
electronic structure of MX2 edges is obtained from an
eleven-band tight-binding model comprising the d metal
valence orbitals and the p valence orbitals of the chalco-
gen atoms. Edge states in the band gap with even sym-
metry (with respect to a mirror through the plane of
M atoms) are qualitatively similar to those found in the
three-band model. As in the latter model, charge neu-
tral zigzag edges are metallic and the armchair edge is
semiconducting in the eleven-band model. Unlike the
three-band model, however, the charge neutrality level is
ﬁxed by edge states of odd symmetry in the band gap.
The odd states have a character that reﬂects the dangling
bonds on the edge atoms, unlike the even states, which
have more of a mixed M-d and X-p character. The odd
edge states are likely to be found near the Fermi level
under experimental conditions, and can not be discarded
when modeling MX2 edges.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is part of the research program of the Foun-
dation for Fundamental Research on Matter (FOM),
which is part of the Netherlands Organization for Sci-
entiﬁc Research (NWO).

FIG. 14. (Color online) As Fig. 12, but for the states with odd
symmetry with respect to a mirror plane through the plane
of the Mo atoms.

character, but it is dominated by Mo d-orbitals. The
edge state at the S-edge has a clear S p character. More
than the even edge states discussed in the previous sec-
tion, these two odd edge states have a “dangling-bond”
character, i.e., they correspond to bulk bonds that are
broken at the edge atoms.

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Growth of 2D semiconductors, such as the transition
metal dichalcogenides MX2, commonly results in sheets
that contain quasi-1D metallic structures, which are lo-
cated at the edges of 2D crystallites, or at the boundaries
between 2D crystal grains. Such edges and grain bound-
aries form a practical realization of 1D metals. Metalic
edges have also been identiﬁed as the active sites in MX2
catalysts. A standard technique for modeling edge or
grain boundary states starts from nanoribbon structures,
which involves using large supercells if one aims at ob-
taining converged results that enable the separation be-
tween edge and bulk properties. Moreover, as a nanorib-
bon has two edges, electron transfer between the edges
can occur in order to equilibrate the system, which com-

(a)	(b)	(c)	(d)	px, py, pzpx, py, pzdxz, dyzdxz, dyzAppendix A: Three-band tight-binding model

15

Following Mattheis, the three-band tight binding model discussed in Sec II C only explicitly uses the sublattice of
1 and E(cid:48) symmetry, i.e., the orbitals that are symmetric with respect to σh,

the M atoms and the d-orbitals of A(cid:48)
mirror symmetry in the MoS2 plane.46 We number these orbitals as

d3z2−r2 = |0(cid:105), dxy = |1(cid:105), dx2−y2 = |2(cid:105).

(A1)
The matrix blocks Hp,q discussed in Sec. II B are then 3× 3 matrices, where Hp,q denotes the real space Hamiltonian
matrix block pertaining to the interaction between atoms in the unit cell at the origin and atoms in the unit cell
at pa1 + qa2. Using only nearest neighbor interactions, one has |p|,|q| ≤ 1. Deﬁning the tight-binding parameters
i = (cid:104)i|h|i(cid:105); i = 0, 1, 2 and tij = (cid:104)i|h|j(cid:105); i, j = 0, 1, 2, and making use of the rotation properties of the d-orbitals, one
derives the matrix blocks

 ;
 .

(A2)

(A3)

 0 0 0

0 1 0
0 0 2

H0,0 =

 t00 −t01

t01
t02

t02
t11 −t12
t22
t12


 ; H1,0 =

 ; H1,1 =

H0,1 =

3

t00
√
2 t02 − 1
2 t02 − √
− 1

2 t01
3
2 t01

3

√
2 t02 + 1
4 t11 + 3

2 t01
4 t22

1

√
4 (t11 − t22) + t12

3

√
− 1
3
2 t01
√
4 (t11 − t22) − t12

2 t02 +

3

1

4 t22 + 3

4 t11

3

t00

−√
2 t02 + 1
2 t02 − √
− 1

2 t01
2 t01 −√
3

3

−√
2 t02 − 1
4 t11 + 3
4 t22
4 (t11 − t22) − t12

2 t01

3

1

√
3
2 t01

− 1
2 t02 +
−√
4 (t11 − t22) + t12
4 t22 + 3

4 t11

1

3

The hopping associated with matrix elements t00, t02, t22, t11 is even with respect to inversion and the one associated

with t01, t12 is odd. It is then easy to see that

H−p,−q = (Hp,q)T

(A4)

The values of the tight-binding parameters are taken from Liu et al.,47 which have been ontained by ﬁtting the
tight-binding band structure of a MX2 sheet to a DFT GGA/PBE band structure,61 using the highest valence band
and the two lowest conduction bands in the ﬁt. GGA/PBE gives an optimized lattice parameter of 3.19 ˚A for MoS2,
which is 1-2 % larger than the reported experimental values.65–67 With this lattice parameter the calculated band gap
is 1.63 eV, which is smaller than the experimental optical band gap of 1.85 eV.68

Appendix B: Eleven-band tight-binding model

The eleven-band tight-binding model of MX2 uses a basis set composed of all ﬁve d-orbitals of the M atom, and the
six p orbitals of the two X atoms. Following the approach of Cappelluti et al.,48,69 we include next nearest neighbor
interactions, and use the Slater-Koster two-center approximation for the hopping matrix elements.70 The real space
matrix blocks Hp,q discussed in Sec. II B then have the form

(cid:35)

(cid:34)

d
(t0,0
dp )T

t0,0
dp
p

(cid:21)

(cid:20) t1,0

0
dd
0 t1,0
pp

(cid:20) t0,1

0
dd
(t0,1
dp )T t0,1
pp

(cid:21)

(cid:20) t1,1

0
dd
(t1,1
dp )T t1,1
pp

(cid:21)

H0,0 =

, H1,0 =

, H0,1 =

, H1,1 =

,

(B1)

with the remaining blocks constructed according to Eq. A4. The bulk Hamiltonian for an inﬁnite layer with two-
dimensional translation symmetry is written in this notation as

H(k1, k2) = H0,0 + A + A†; A = H1,0ei2πk1 + H0,1ei2πk2 + H1,1ei2π(k1+k2).

(B2)

The parameters in the model can be found by ﬁtting the tight-binding band structure obtained with this bulk
Hamiltonian to a band structure obtained from a DFT calculation. The model turns out to be too restrictive to
obtain a satisfactory ﬁt for all eleven bands with one parameter set. A good ﬁt can however be obtained if we divide
the bands into a set of even symmetry, and a set of odd symmetry, and use diﬀerent parameters for the two sets.
Mirror symmetry σh in the MX2 plane holds for monolayers, as well as for edges, so states that are even or odd with
respect to σh, can be treated separately. In Sec. B 1 we give the expressions for the matrix blocks a and tp,q
in
ab
Eq. B1 for the even states, and in Sec. B 2 for the odd states.

The even states are composed of orbitals of E(cid:48) and A(cid:48)

1 symmetry,

1. Even states

d3z2−r2 = |0(cid:105), dxy = |1(cid:105), dx2−y2 = |2(cid:105),
1√
2

[px(X1) + px(X2)] = |3(cid:105),

1√
2

[py(X1) + py(X2)] = |4(cid:105),

[pz(X1) − pz(X2)] = |5(cid:105).

1√
2

The matrix blocks a and tp,q

ab in Eq. B1 are then all 3 × 3

 , p =

 px + Vppπ

0
0

0

px + Vppπ

0

0
0

pz − Vppσ

where a are the on-site orbital energies and Vabα are the Slater-Koster two-center integrals.70 Similarly,

d =

0
0

0
xy
0

0
0
xy

 3z2−r2
 9Vpdπ − √

√
√
2
7
7

 ,
 ,

√
√
3Vpdπ − Vpdσ
√
√
√
3Vpdσ
3Vpdσ
3
12Vpdπ +
−Vpdπ − 3
3Vpdπ − 3Vpdσ −6Vpdπ + 3
3Vpdσ −5
9Vpdπ − √
√
3Vpdσ
3Vpdπ − 3Vpdσ
−5
3Vpdπ + 3Vpdσ

3Vpdσ −2

√

t0,0
dp =

 1

t1,0
dd =

4 (3Vddδ + Vddσ)
8 (−Vddδ + Vddσ)
3
√
8 (−Vddδ + Vddσ)
3

3

8 (−Vddδ + Vddσ)

1
16 (3Vddδ + 4Vppπ + 9Vddσ)
√
16 (Vddδ − 4Vddπ + 3Vddσ)

3

3

√
8 (−Vddδ + Vddσ)

√
16 (Vddδ − 4Vddπ + 3Vddσ)
1
16 (Vddδ + 12Vppπ + 3Vddσ)

3

 1

t1,0
pp =

4 (3Vppπ + Vppσ)
√
4 (Vppπ − Vppσ)
3

0

3

√
4 (Vppπ − Vppσ)
1
4 (Vppπ + 3Vppσ)

0

0
0

Vppπ

 ,

 1

4 (3Vddδ + Vddσ)
8 (Vddδ − Vddσ)
3
√
8 (−Vddδ + Vddσ)

3

t0,1
dd =

3

8 (Vddδ − Vddσ)

1
16 (3Vddδ + 4Vppπ + 9Vddσ)
√
16 (−Vddδ + 4Vddπ − 3Vddσ)
3

3

√
8 (−Vddδ + Vddσ)

√
16 (−Vddδ + 4Vddπ − 3Vddσ)
1
16 (Vddδ + 12Vppπ + 3Vddσ)

3

 ,

 ,

 1

t0,1
pp =

4 (3Vppπ + Vppσ)
√
4 (−Vppπ + Vppσ)
3

0

√
4 (−Vppπ + Vppσ)
3
1
4 (Vppπ + 3Vppσ)

0

0
0

Vppπ

 , t0,1

dp =

√
√
2
7

√
Vpdπ
0
0 −3Vpdπ − 2

3Vpdπ + Vpdσ 6Vpdπ + 1
2
0

√

3Vpdσ
3Vpdπ − 3Vpdσ

3Vpdσ 2

16

(B3)

(B4)

(B5)

(B6)

(B7)

(B8)

√

 ,

(B9)

(B10)

(B11)

2
7

 0
 , t1,1

pp =

√

−3

 Vppσ

0
0

√
4 (Vddδ − Vddσ)

3

0

0

Vddπ

0

1
4 (Vddδ + 3Vddσ)

 1

t1,1
dd =

4 (3Vddδ + Vddσ)
√
4 (Vddδ − Vddσ)

0

3

√
√
2
7
7

t1,1
dp =

 −9Vpdπ +

−Vpdπ − 3
√
5

√
√

√
√
3Vpdσ 3
9Vpdπ − √
3Vpdσ 5

3Vpdπ − Vpdσ
3Vpdπ + 3Vpdσ

3Vpdσ −2

√
√
12Vpdπ +
6Vpdπ − 3
√

3Vpdσ
3Vpdσ
3Vpdπ + 3Vpdσ

3Vpdπ + 3Vpdσ

 ,

0

Vppπ

0

Vppπ

0
0

 .

We use values of the parameters as obtained by Rostami at al.
from ﬁtting the even tight-binding bands to DFT
GGA/PBE bands.62 A lattice parameter of 3.16 ˚A for MoS2 has been used in these calculations, which is 1% smaller
than the optimized GGA/PBE value, but close to the reported experimental values. It results in a calculated band
gap of 1.76 eV, which is slightly smaller than the experimental optical band gap of 1.85 eV.68 We have shifted the
tight-binding bands such, that the zero of energy coincides with the top of the valence band.

The odd states are composed of orbitals of E(cid:48)(cid:48) and A(cid:48)(cid:48)

1 symmetry,

2. Odd states

17

dxz = |1(cid:48)(cid:105), dyz = |2(cid:48)(cid:105),
1√
2

[px(X1) − px(X2)] = |3(cid:48)(cid:105),

[pz(X1) + pz(X2)] = |5(cid:48)(cid:105).
The matrix blocks a in Eq. B1 are 2 × 2 if a = d and 3 × 3 if a = p, whereas the matrix blocks tp,q
ab = dd, 3 × 3 if ab = pp, and 2 × 3 if ab = dp

[py(X1) − py(X2)] = |4(cid:48)(cid:105),

1√
2

1√
2

(B12)
ab are are 2 × 2 if

d =

, p =

(cid:21)

0
(cid:48)

xz

(cid:20) (cid:48)
(cid:20) √

xz
0

√
√
2
7
7

t0,0
dp =

 (cid:48)

px

ppπ

− V (cid:48)
0
0

 ,

0
0
+ V (cid:48)

ppσ

(cid:21)

,

3V (cid:48)
pdπ − 3

pdπ − 9V (cid:48)
3V (cid:48)

√

pdσ

pdσ

(cid:48)

0
− V (cid:48)
0

px

ppπ

pz

(cid:48)
pdσ −√
3V (cid:48)
pdσ −V (cid:48)
pdπ + 3V (cid:48)

√

(cid:34) 1

t1,0
dd =

4 (3V (cid:48)
√
4 (V (cid:48)

ddδ + V (cid:48)
ddδ − V (cid:48)

ddπ)
ddπ)

3

3

√
4 (V (cid:48)
4 (V (cid:48)

ddδ − V (cid:48)
ddδ + 3V (cid:48)

1

ddπ)

ppπ)

(cid:34) 1
4 (3V (cid:48)
√
4 (−V (cid:48)

3

ddδ + V (cid:48)
ddπ)
ddδ + V (cid:48)
ddπ)

t0,1
dd =

pdσ −6V (cid:48)
pdπ + 9V (cid:48)
3V (cid:48)
√
√
pdπ + 3
−6V (cid:48)
3V (cid:48)
3V (cid:48)
pdπ + 3
5
(cid:35)

pdσ

 1
 1

, t1,0

pp =

(cid:35)

, t0,1

pp =

3

√
4 (−V (cid:48)
4 (V (cid:48)

ddδ + V (cid:48)
ddπ)
ddδ + 3V (cid:48)
ddπ)

1

3V (cid:48)
0

pdπ

(cid:20) √
(cid:20) V (cid:48)

√
√
2
7
7

t0,1
dp =

t1,1
dd =

−√
(cid:21)

ddπ
0

0
V (cid:48)

ddδ

, t1,1

pp =

4 (3V (cid:48)
√
4 (V (cid:48)

ppπ + V (cid:48)
ppπ − V (cid:48)

ppσ)
ppσ)

3

0

3

√
4 (V (cid:48)
4 (V (cid:48)

ppπ − V (cid:48)
ppπ + 3V (cid:48)

1

ppσ)
ppσ)

0

 ,

0
0
V (cid:48)

ppπ

4 (3V (cid:48)
√
4 (−V (cid:48)

ppπ + V (cid:48)
ppσ)
ppπ + V (cid:48)
ppσ)
0

3

ppπ + V (cid:48)
ppσ)
ppπ + 3V (cid:48)
ppσ)

0

3

1

√
4 (−V (cid:48)
4 (V (cid:48)
(cid:21)

0
0
V (cid:48)

ppπ

3V (cid:48)

pdσ

 ,

0
V (cid:48)
ppπ
0

0
0
V (cid:48)

ppπ

 V (cid:48)

ppσ
0
0
√

(B13)

(B14)

(B15)

(B16)

 ,

0

3V (cid:48)

pdπ + 12V (cid:48)

pdσ 2V (cid:48)

√

0
pdπ + 6

,

(B17)

(cid:20) √

√
√
2
7
7

t1,1
dp =

3V (cid:48)
pdπ − 3

pdπ − 3
pdσ 6V (cid:48)
pdπ + 9V (cid:48)
√
3V (cid:48)
3V (cid:48)
pdσ 5

3V (cid:48)
pdπ + 3V (cid:48)

√

6V (cid:48)

√
pdπ + 9V (cid:48)
3V (cid:48)
√
pdπ − 3
pdσ −V (cid:48)
3V (cid:48)

pdσ

pdσ

pdσ

(cid:21)

.

(B18)

(B19)

We obtain values of the parameters by ﬁtting the tight-binding bands of odd symmetry to bands obtained from a
density functional theory (DFT) calculation with the generalized gradient GGA/PBE functional,61,71,72 using the
same lattice parameter as for the even bands. The optimal parameters are given in table I, and the quality of the ﬁt
can be judged from Fig. 15.

1 A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater. 6, 183 (2007).
2 M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi, and H. Chen, Chem. Rev. 113,

3766 (2013).

3 A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature 499, 419 (2013).
4 M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh,

and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem. 5, 263275 (2013).

5 S. Helveg, J. V. Lauritsen, E. Lægsgaard, I. Stensgaard,
J. K. Nørskov, B. S. Clausen, H. Topsøe, and F. Besen-
bacher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 951 (2000).

6 L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li, A. Sri-
vastava, Z. F. Wang, K. Storr, L. Balicas, F. Liu, and
P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater. 9, 430 (2010).

TABLE I. Values of the tight-binding parameters (eV) used
for the band of odd symmetry.
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
V (cid:48)
V (cid:48)
V (cid:48)

-2.188
0.604
-0.075
1.166
2.115

0.051
-0.389
-0.626

-0.682

pz

(cid:48)
V (cid:48)
V (cid:48)
V (cid:48)

ddπ

ppσ

px

xz

pdσ

ddδ

ppπ

pdπ

FIG. 15. (Color online) GGA/PBE band structure (black) of
the odd symmetry bands of MoS2; (red) tight-binding ﬁt.

7 M. P. Levendorf, C.-J. Kim, L. Brown, P. Y. Huang, R. W.
and J. Park, Nature 488, 627

Havener, D. A. Muller,
(2012).

8 A. M. van der Zande, P. Y. Huang, D. A. Chenet, T. C.
Berkelbach, Y. You, G.-H. Lee, T. F. Heinz, D. R. Reich-
man, D. A. Muller, and J. C. Hone, Nat. Mater. 12, 554
(2013).

9 S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Zou, G. Shi, S. Lei, B. I.
Yakobson, J.-C. Idrobo, P. M. Ajayan, and J. Lou, Nat.
Mater. 12, 754 (2013).

10 H. Liu, L. Jiao, F. Yang, Y. Cai, X. Wu, W. Ho, C. Gao,
J. Jia, N. Wang, H. Fan, W. Yao, and M. Xie, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 113, 066105 (2014).

11 M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L.
Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H.
Chang, K. Suenaga, and L.-J. Li, Science 349, 524 (2015).
12 Y.-W. Son, M. L. Cohen, and S. G. Louie, Nature 444,

347 (2006).

13 O. V. Yazyev and M. I. Katsnelson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100,

047209 (2008).

14 M. V. Bollinger, J. V. Lauritsen, K. W. Jacobsen, J. K.
Nørskov, S. Helveg, and F. Besenbacher, Phys. Rev. Lett.
87, 196803 (2001).

15 M. V. Bollinger, K. W. Jacobsen, and J. K. Nørskov, Phys.

Rev. B 67, 085410 (2003).

16 A. Vojvodic, B. Hinnemann, and J. K. Nørskov, Phys.

Rev. B 80, 125416 (2009).

17 A. R. Botello-M´endez, F. L´opez-Ur´ıas, M. Terrones, and

H. Terrones, Nanotechnology 20, 325703 (2009).

18 K. Andersen, K. W. Jacobsen, and K. S. Thygesen, Phys.

Rev. B 90, 161410 (2014).

19 X. Zou, Y. Liu, and B. I. Yakobson, Nano Lett. 13, 253

18

(2013).

20 W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong,
J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson, and J.-C. Idrobo,
Nano Lett. 13, 2615 (2013).

21 T. Giamarchi, Quantum Physics in One Dimension (Ox-

ford University Press, Oxford, 2003).

22 H. Schweiger, P. Raybaud, G. Kresse, and H. Toulhoat,

J. Catal. 207, 76 (2002).

23 K. Nakada, M. Fujita, G. Dresselhaus, and M. S. Dressel-

haus, Phys. Rev. B 54, 17954 (1996).

24 A. R. Akhmerov and C. W. J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. B

77, 085423 (2008).

25 P. Delplace, D. Ullmo, and G. Montambaux, Phys. Rev.

B 84, 195452 (2011).

26 C. Ataca, H. S¸ahin, E. Akt¨urk, and S. Ciraci, J. Phys.

Chem. C 115, 3934 (2011).

27 Z. Wang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Shi, J. Lu, K. Suenaga, S.-
K. Joung, T. Okazaki, Z. Gu, J. Zhou, Z. Gao, G. Li,
S. Sanvito, E. Wang, and S. Iijima, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
132, 13840 (2010).

28 L. Kou, C. Tang, Y. Zhang, T. Heine, C. Chen,
T. Frauenheim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 3, 2934 (2012).

and

29 L. F. Seivane, H. Barron, S. Botti, M. A. Lopes Marques,
´A. Rubio, and X. L´opez-Lozano, J. Mater. Res. 28, 240
(2013).

30 D. C¸ akır and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B 89, 245403

(2014).

31 R.-L. Chu, G.-B. Liu, W. Yao, X. Xu, D. Xiao,

and

C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 89, 155317 (2014).

32 G. Xu, J. Wang, B. Yan, and X.-L. Qi, Phys. Rev. B 90,

100505 (2014).

33 M. C. Lucking, J. Bang, H. Terrones, Y.-Y. Sun,

and

S. Zhang, Chem. Mater. 27, 3326 (2015).

34 S. Pavlovi´c and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B 91, 155410

(2015).

35 J. Bernholc and S. T. Pantelides, Phys. Rev. B 18, 1780

(1978).

36 J. Pollmann and S. T. Pantelides, Phys. Rev. B 18, 5524

(1978).

37 D. H. Lee and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 23, 4988

(1981).

38 D. H. Lee and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 23, 4997

(1981).

39 Y.-C. Chang and J. N. Schulman, Phys. Rev. B 25, 3975

(1982).

40 T. Ando, Phys. Rev. B 44, 8017 (1991).
41 P. A. Khomyakov and G. Brocks, Phys. Rev. B 70, 195402

(2004).

42 P. A. Khomyakov, G. Brocks, V. Karpan, M. Zwierzycki,

and P. J. Kelly, Phys. Rev. B 72, 035450 (2005).

43 P. A. Khomyakov and G. Brocks, Phys. Rev. B 74, 165416

(2006).

44 M. Zwierzycki, P. A. Khomyakov, A. A. Starikov, K. Xia,
M. Talanana, P. X. Xu, V. M. Karpan, I. Marushchenko,
I. Turek, G. E. W. Bauer, G. Brocks, and P. J. Kelly,
Phys. Status. Solidi. B 245, 623 (2008).

45 F. Tisseur and K. Meerbergen, SIAM Rev. 43, 235 (2001).
46 L. F. Mattheiss, Phys. Rev. B 8, 3719 (1973).
47 G.-B. Liu, W.-Y. Shan, Y. Yao, W. Yao, and D. Xiao,

Phys. Rev. B 88, 085433 (2013).

48 E. Cappelluti, R. Rold´an, J. A. Silva-Guill´en, P. Ordej´on,

and F. Guinea, Phys. Rev. B 88, 075409 (2013).

49 Y. Hatsugai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3697 (1993).
50 Y. Hatsugai, T. Fukui, and H. Aoki, Phys. Rev. B 74,

GKMG-6-4-2024E-EF(eV)19

205414 (2006).

62 H. Rostami, R. Rold´an, E. Cappelluti, R. Asgari, and

51 J. C. Y. Teo, L. Fu, and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 78,

F. Guinea, Phys. Rev. B 92, 195402 (2015).

045426 (2008).

52 R. S. K. Mong and V. Shivamoggi, Phys. Rev. B 83, 125109

(2011).

63 R. Coehoorn, C. Haas, J. Dijkstra, C. J. F. Flipse, R. A.

de Groot, and A. Wold, Phys. Rev. B 35, 6195 (1987).

64 S. S. Pershoguba and V. M. Yakovenko, Phys. Rev. B 86,

53 G. Golub and C. F. van Loan, Matrix Computations (Johns

075304 (2012).

Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1996).

54 W. A. Harrison, Phys. Scripta. 67, 253 (2003).
55 X. Dang, J. D. Burton, A. Kalitsov, J. P. Velev, and E. Y.

Tsymbal, Phys. Rev. B 90, 155307 (2014).

56 K. S. Yong, D. M. Otalvaro, I. Duchemin, M. Saeys, and

C. Joachim, Phys. Rev. B 77, 205429 (2008).

65 P. A. Young, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 1, 936 (1968).
66 A. Al-Hilli and B. Evans, J. Cryst. Growth 15, 93 (1972).
67 T. B¨oker, R. Severin, A. M¨uller, C. Janowitz, R. Manzke,
D. Voß, P. Kr¨uger, A. Mazur, and J. Pollmann, Phys. Rev.
B 64, 235305 (2001).

68 K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan, and T. F. Heinz,

57 S. McDonnell, R. Addou, C. Buie, R. M. Wallace, and

Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136805 (2010).

C. L. Hinkle, ACS Nano 8, 2880 (2014).

58 S. KC, R. C. Longo, R. Addou, R. M. Wallace,

and

K. Cho, Nanotechnology 25, 375703 (2014).

59 F. G¨uller, A. M. Llois, J. Goniakowski, and C. Noguera,

Phys. Rev. B 87, 205423 (2013).

60 M. Gilbertini and N. Marzari, Nano Lett. 15, 6229 (2015).
61 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

69 A. Castellanos-Gomez, R. Rold´an, E. Cappelluti,
M. Buscema, F. Guinea, H. S. J. van der Zant, and G. A.
Steele, Nano Letters 13, 5361 (2013).

70 J. C. Slater and G. F. Koster, Phys. Rev. 94, 1498 (1954).
71 G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169

(1996).

72 G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).

