The LOFAR Solar Imaging Pipeline and the LOFAR Solar Data Center

F. Breitling, G. Mann, C. Vocks, M. Steinmetz, K. G. Strassmeier

Leibniz-Institut f¨ur Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, 14482 Potsdam, Germany

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
0
9
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

LOFAR is a new and sensitive radio interferometer that can be used for dynamic high-resolution imaging
spectroscopy at low radio frequencies from 10 to 90 and 110 to 250 MHz. Here we describe its usage for
observations of the Sun and in particular of solar radio bursts. We also describe the processing, archiving
and accessing of solar LOFAR data, which is accomplished via the LOFAR Solar Imaging Pipeline and the
LOFAR Solar Data Center.

Keywords:

instrumentation: interferometers, methods: data analysis, Sun: radio radiation, Sun: corona

1. Introduction

The Sun is a low to moderate activity star and
because of its proximity to Earth a unique astro-
physical object for studying stellar phenomena in
great detail. Radio observations can make substan-
tial contributions to such studies since the Sun is
an intense radio source. Its 106 K hot corona emits
thermal radio radiation. In addition, solar activity
produces intense non-thermal radio radiation ob-
served as radio bursts [McLean, 1985, Warmuth &
Mann, 2005, Mann, 2006]. They are caused by a re-
lease of energy during a reconﬁguration of the Sun’s
magnetic ﬁeld which also results in ﬂares and erup-
tive events such as coronal mass ejections. The radi-
ation is generated by plasma emission and emitted
near the local plasma frequency and/or its harmon-
ics [Melrose, 1985]. For instance, type III bursts
are a typical phenomenon in solar radio radiation
and are signatures of energetic electrons propagat-
ing along magnetic ﬁeld lines in the corona [Wild,
1950, Suzuki & Dulk, 1985, Breitling et al., 2011].
Since the radio emission occurs near the local elec-
tron plasma frequency fpe = (e2Ne/0me)1/2/2π
(e, elementary charge; 0, permittivity of free space;
me, electron mass), and because of the gravita-
tional density stratiﬁcation of the corona, higher
and lower frequencies are emitted in the lower and
higher corona, respectively.

With the Low Frequency Array (LOFAR, van
Haarlem et al. [2013]) a sensitive high resolution ra-
dio interferometer became available for radio obser-

vations in the frequency range from 10 to 250 MHz
corresponding to a radial distance between 1 and 3
solar radii (R(cid:12)) in the corona [Mann et al., 1999].
Its capability for high resolution dynamic imaging
spectroscopy makes it particularly useful for spa-
tial and time resolved observations of solar radio
burst. The LOFAR Key Science Project “Solar
Physics and Space Weather with LOFAR” (Solar
KSP, Mann et al. [2011]) was formed to use LO-
FAR for solar observations and to address open
questions.
Its goals are the coordination of solar
observations, the solar data processing and analy-
sis and the provision of the resulting data products
to the scientiﬁc community. These goals led to the
development of the LOFAR Solar Imaging Pipeline
and the LOFAR Solar Data Center described here.

2. LOFAR

LOFAR [van Haarlem et al., 2013] is a European
digital radio interferometer developed under the
leadership of the Netherlands Institute for Radio
Astronomy (ASTRON). It currently consists of 48
antenna stations distributed over the Netherlands
(40), Germany (5), United Kingdom (1), France (1)
and Sweden (1) with its center near Netherlands
city Groningen. Additional stations are currently
under constructions in Poland (3) and Germany (1)
or in the planning phase. A LOFAR station consists
of high- and low-band antenna ﬁelds and an elec-
tronics container with the receiver and computer

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

September 28, 2015

hardware. An antenna ﬁeld is composed of iden-
tical antennas, which are added to a station beam
(or pointing) to receive the signal from a speciﬁc
sky direction. The data of the station pointings are
sent to the correlator in Groningen which forms the
array or sub-array pointings.
LOFAR operates in the low frequency range from
10− 90 (low-band) and 110− 250 MHz (high-band)
in full polarization with high sensitivity and res-
olution for imaging spectroscopy. LOFAR’s beam
forming allows for the simultaneous observation of
several diﬀerent sky regions, which is important for
the calibration of highly variable radio sources like
the Sun.
It also allows the simultaneous record-
ing of dynamic radio spectra and images at diﬀer-
ent frequencies. These capabilities make LOFAR a
very powerful instrument for imaging spectroscopy
of celestial radio sources and to a radio heliograph
if applied to the Sun.

3. The Solar Imaging Pipeline

The Solar Imaging Pipeline is a software pack-
age for analyzing LOFAR observations of the Sun.
It was developed by the Solar KSP at the Leibniz-
Institut f¨ur Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP) as an ex-
tension of the LOFAR Standard Imaging Pipeline
[Heald et al., 2011] to accomplish a proper data
processing for solar LOFAR data.
It is necessary
because of the diﬀerences between solar and stan-
dard observations and the consequences for the data
processing. They are summarized in Table 1 and 2
and explained below.

3.1. Characteristics of solar observations

3.1.1. High variability of solar radio emission

The radio emission from most radio sources that
LOFAR observes such as galaxies is constant and
ranges from 0.1 to 100 Jy. However, the emission
from the Sun at 100 MHz is about 104 Jy (1 solar
ﬂux unit, sfu) during quiet periods but it can rise
to 1012 Jy (108 sfu) within a few seconds in case of
solar radio bursts [Mann, 2010, Dulk, 2000] which
can occur anywhere near the Sun. So solar radio
observations need to be able to record a dynamic
range in brightness of 8 orders of magnitude with a
time resolution of seconds. Consequences:

• A time resolution of seconds prevents the typ-
ical aperture synthesis which uses the Earth’s
rotation and observation times of hours for

Figure 1: uv-coverage (baselines) for 12 hours of data. Be-
cause of the Earth’s rotation each point in the uv-plane mul-
tiplies into an arc like point set.

Figure 2: uv-coverage for 1 second of data. The box indicates
the approximate region of points (baselines) that remain if
the uv-range is limited to ≤ 1000 wavelengths.

increasing the uv-coverage and image qual-
ity. Fig. 1 and 2 show the uv-coverage with
and without aperture synthesis for compari-
son. Each point in the uv-plane represent a
baseline.

• The short duration of some bursts prevents
temporal radio frequency interference (RFI)
removal also called ﬂagging, since ﬂagging of
radio peaks could also remove the signals of
solar bursts.

• Dynamic radio spectra are recorded simulta-
neously with the imaging data, since they can
provide a higher time and frequency resolution
at a lower data rate. They also support the
identiﬁcation of solar bursts in LOFAR data.

2

Table 1: Diﬀerences between observations of the Sun and standard radio sources.

Temporal resolution [s]

Spatial resolution [arcsec]

No. of stations
No. of baselines

Field of view [deg]

Typical ﬂux density [Jy]
Typical noise level [Jy]

Dynamic range of ﬂux density

[orders of magnitude]

Ionospheric scintillation

High res. dynamic spectroscopy

Standard radio source

≥ 104
∼ 1
≥ 48
> 103
> 101
(cid:28) 103
10−1
0

low
no

Sun
≤ 1
∼ 101
≤ 30
< 5 × 102
∼ 1
104 − 1012

102

8

high
yes

Table 2: Diﬀerences between standard and solar data processing resulting from the diﬀerences in the observations of Table 1.

Aperture synthesis

Flagging

uv-range [wavelengths]

Sky model source threshold
Distance calibrator - target

Demixing

Imager

CLEAN algorithms

Self-calibration

Solar Data Center

Standard Imaging

Solar Imaging

in frequency & time

yes
0 − 106
≤ 50 Jy
≤ 1 deg

yes

AWImager

no

in frequency only

0 − 103
∼ 103 Jy
≥ 5 deg

no

CASA imager

Clark for point sources multi-scale for ext. sources
limited to selected events

yes
no

yes

3.1.2. Limited resolution in the corona

3.1.3. Suﬃcient ﬁeld of view

While standard targets can be resolved with sub-
arcsec resolution, the spatial resolution of solar ob-
servations is limited to a few ten arcsec by turbu-
lence in the corona [Bastian, 2004]. Consequences:

• Since the angular resolution is proportional to
the inverse of the baseline length, the uv-range
can be limited to a maximum baseline length of
1000 wavelengths. The box in Fig. 2 marks the
approximate subset of stations that remains
with this limitation.

• International stations and some remote sta-
tions are not needed since they provide only
baselines with a length of more than 1000
wavelengths. This reduces the number of base-
lines nb = ns×(ns−1)/2 (where ns is the num-
ber of stations) and therefore limits the image
resolution.

Since solar radio emission is a result of plasma
emission determined by the plasma density of the
corona, radio emission in the frequency range from
10 to 240 MHz is limited to a region within 3R(cid:12).
This region is well contained with the LOFAR ﬁeld
of view of approximately 5 degrees. Consequence:
• A ﬁeld of view of 3R(cid:12) does not require the
corrections provided by the AWImaging [Tasse
et al., 2013] and so the CASA imager can be
used as well. This was an advantage early in
LOFAR’s commissioning phase when the AW-
Imager was not available and when functional-
ity is required that is not yet implemented.

3.1.4. High ﬂux density of solar radio emission

Another diﬀerence exists with the radio sources
that can be used for calibration. For many sky
regions detailed sky models exist with a resolution
of a few Jy which the Sun passes during a year.
But since the Sun emits a ﬂux density of 104 Jy or

3

Figure 3: Sky map of intense radio sources and their location with respect to the Sun. The yellow line shows the path of the
Sun during one year. The area of each source represents its ﬂux density. A compact source with a high ﬂux density and a
distance of a few 10 degrees is best suited for the calibration of solar data.

Figure 4: Annual variation of the distance (∆) of sources with high ﬂux density that are used as calibrator for solar LOFAR
data.

orders of magnitudes more its radiation dominates
the signal from these sky regions and is picked up
through LOFAR’s side lobes. Consequences:

• Only strong radio sources can serve as calibra-
tors. These sources are Cassiopeia A, Cygnus
A, Taurus A and Virgo A (Fig. 3). For this rea-
son solar observations are done with two sub-
array pointings. One is directed at the Sun and
the other at a suitable calibrator source. This
way the calibration coeﬃcients can be obtained
from the calibrator data and then applied to
the data from the Sun. However, this adds ad-
ditional constraints for the observation. First
the angular distance between the Sun and the

4

calibrator may neither be too small (< 5 deg)
nor too large (> 50 deg), since otherwise the
calibrator will be perturbed by the Sun or the
calibration will be perturbed by an imperfect
beam model, respectively. Fig. 4 shows the
distance (∆) of the calibrators to the Sun ver-
sus time. Second the Sun and the calibrator
need to be observed at suﬃciently high alti-
tude angles (> 20 deg) since otherwise their
radio emission is too much perturbed by the
atmosphere. This condition also excludes ob-
servations during winter months from Novem-
ber to February. Fig. 5 shows the altitudes
which have to be taken into account for an ob-
servation on July 1.

Figure 6: Flowchart of the Standard Imaging Pipeline and the modiﬁcations (orange) that lead to the Solar Imaging Pipeline.
The data ﬂow starts with the online processing and ends at the Solar Data Center. The crossed out components are not needed
for solar imaging. Details of the individual components are described in the text.

processing, when demixing is applied for stan-
dard imaging. So demixing is not yet part of
imaging of the Sun.

3.1.5. Observations during day time

LOFAR Solar observations have to be done dur-
ing daytime, preferably at noon. At noon iono-
spheric scintillation also reach their maximum.
Consequence:

• Ionospheric scintillation causes diﬀerent phase
delays for diﬀerent atmospheric regions the ra-
dio signals pass on their way to diﬀerent LO-
FAR stations. This leads to calibration and
imaging errors, more severely during day time
than during night time. This is also another
reason for a lower image quality of solar obser-
vations than of other observations which are
usually taken during night time.

3.2. The solar data processing

The solar imaging pipeline was developed accord-
ing to the above criteria. The outline is shown
in Fig. 6.
It shows the data ﬂow and in orange
color the modiﬁcations from the Standard Imaging
Pipeline. The individual steps and components are
discussed below.

Figure 5: Daily variation of the altitude of solar calibra-
tors. Low altitude observations provide data of lower quality
which are also harder to calibrate. The LSDC provides these
plots for every day of the year to support the scheduling of
observations.

• Similar to the emission from the Sun also the
emission from the calibrators eﬀects the so-
lar data. Therefore its inﬂuence should be re-
moved by demixing. Demixing is a method
in which the contribution from certain radio
sources is modeled and subtracted from the
data. Unfortunately, demixing often does not
work well without a model for the radio emis-
sion from the Sun which is not available at pre-

5

3.2.1. Online processing

The LOFAR data from all stations is correlated
at a computer cluster in Groningen. This correlates
the data in real-time and stores it at a temporary
storage for a later processing. Currently either low
or high-band antenna data is recorded at several
equidistant frequencies. Each of these frequency
subbands has a bandwidth of 195 kHz and a subdi-
vision into 64 channels. During solar observations
also beam-formed data for dynamic spectroscopy is
recorded in addition to visibility data which is used
for standard imaging.

3.2.2. Temporary storage and data formats

The immediate processing of the data as shown
in Fig. 6 is not yet realized but a planned processing
option for the future. Instead the data is currently
sent to a temporary storage. The imaging and spec-
troscopic data is recorded in CASA Measurement
Sets (MS, McMullin et al. [2007]) and LOFAR’s
beam-formed format [Stappers et al., 2011] with
an HDF5 container [The HDF Group, 1997-2014]
respectively. An MS contains the data of only one
subband. The raw data rate scales with the number
of channels recorded and is roughly 30 times larger
than data with a single channel average. The typ-
ical size for the latter is about 1 GB for 10 hours
of data with time resolution of 1s. The correspond-
ing JPEG images and thumbnails have about the
same size, while the FITS images need about three
times as much. The size of beam-formed data scales
with the time resolution and number of channels. It
is similar to the size of one MS while providing a
higher resolution. In summary a typical solar ob-
servation of a few hours produces a few TB of data.

3.2.3. New Default

Pre-Processing

Pipeline

(NDPPP)

The ﬁrst step in the pre-processing of imaging
data is done with the New Default Pre-Processing
Pipeline (NDPPP). This includes ﬂagging of the
channels of the calibrator data for RFI with the
AOFlagger [Oﬀringa et al., 2013]. The Sun data are
not ﬂagged, to preserve all variable radio features.
Subsequently, the channels (excluding edge chan-
nel) of all subbands are averaged to one channel
per subband and the uv-range is limited to 0-1000
wavelengths.

3.2.4. BlackBoard Selfcal (BBS)

The second step of the pre-processing is the cal-
ibration with LOFAR’s BlackBoard Selfcal (BBS)

6

system. Here amplitude and phase corrections are
determined for every 30 seconds of calibrator data
using a corresponding sky model. The solutions are
then transferred to the data from the Sun. Alter-
natively also two Gaussian sky models of the Sun
for low- and high-bands have been developed which
can be used for direct calibration of the data from
the Sun. However this calibration is less accurate
because of the extension of the model only short
baselines can be calibrated. Also the determina-
tion of the astrometric position is limited to a few
arcmin because of the asymmetric variability of the
corona.

3.2.5. Solar calibration parameters

BBS is controlled through certain conﬁguration
parameters. The speciﬁc parameters for the Sun are
derived from the standard imaging parameters and
are included in the Solar Imaging Pipeline. They
are optimized for the calibration of strong calibrator
sources and a transfer of the calibration coeﬃcients
to the solar data.

3.2.6. Imaging

After the calibration the corrected data is im-
aged with the multi-scale CLEAN algorithm pro-
vided by CASA [McMullin et al., 2007]. The ﬁnal
image is then transformed from equatorial to so-
lar coordinates where the Sun is centered and the
Sun’s north pole is oriented upwards. This is done
for every time step and frequency. Alternatively
the CASA imager can be replaced by the AWIm-
ager. The AWImager provides additional correc-
tion by the w- and A-projection. The former pro-
jection removes the eﬀects of non co-planar base-
lines in large ﬁelds. The latter takes into account
a varying primary beam during synthesis observa-
tions. However, both corrections are not necessary
for the small ﬁeld of view used in solar observations.
With the CASA imager also images from multiple
integration steps can be combined. This so-called
aperture synthesis virtually increases the number
of baselines by combining data from diﬀerent times
where the antenna positions have shifted because
of the Earth’s rotation. Aperture synthesis for
the Sun is complicated since its RA/Dec coordi-
nates change while imaging is normally done for a
ﬁxed RA/Dec coordinate. Therefore the aperture
synthesis was extended for sources with changing
RA/Dec coordinates.
It can be activated via the
“movingsource” option of the CASA imager. With

the key word “SUN” every time step of an obser-
vation is shifted such that the position of the Sun
remains ﬁxed. This avoids smearing of the Sun dur-
ing longer observations periods of hours.

3.2.7. Self-calibration

Optionally

an

additional

phase-only

self-
calibration can be applied to selected images.
In
the standard imaging pipeline a source ﬁnding
algorithm is applied to the image to ﬁnd sources
not contained in the sky model. These are then
added to the sky model and applied in a new
calibration. For solar observations a simpliﬁed
method is used which directly uses the cleaned
images as model. Since it does not require assump-
tions about the sources to ﬁnd, it is useful where
little is known about the radio source morphology.
Then imaging is repeated resulting in a reduced
noise and increased source brightness. Further
self-calibration cycles can be repeated if needed
until no further improvement is achieved. This is
usually the case after one or two cycles.

3.2.8. Simulation of images

The solar imaging pipeline automatically simu-
lates images of a Gaussian model of the Sun, the
point spread function (PSF, Fig. 7) and the con-
tributions from the intense radio sources Cygnus
A, Cassiopeia A, Taurus A and Virgo A through
side-lobes to the model. This is very instructive for
understanding the solar images and their ﬁdelity
for a given array conﬁguration. The simulated im-
ages are accessible through the LOFAR Solar Data
Center described in section 4.

3.2.9. Solar Pipeline controller

The Solar Imaging Pipeline controller replaces
the scheduler of the standard imaging pipeline. It
is capable of the data management, which includes
the distribution of data to the LOFAR processing
cluster and its collection. It also controls the steps
of the solar imaging pipeline the LOFAR data is
run through.

3.2.10. Solar toolbox

The solar toolbox contains further programs for
various tasks related to the data processing. This
includes calculations of solar coordinates and an-
gles, image format conversion, extraction of speciﬁc
observation periods, job and disk space monitoring,
the correction of pointing positions and many other
tasks.

Figure 7: Simulated radio images of a two-dimensional Gaus-
sian model of the Sun (top), this model with side-lobe con-
tributions from the four strong radio sources mentioned in
section 3.2.8 (middle) and of the PSF (bottom) for an ob-
servation on March 9, 2014.

7

Figure 8: Main page of the LOFAR Solar Data Center showing data from observations cycle 0. The available observations are
listed chronologically line by line and linked to their corresponding observation page.

3.2.11. Dynamic spectra

4. The LOFAR Solar Data Center

The Solar Imaging Pipeline also provides the
spectrum maker for processing beam-formed data.
This identiﬁes and excludes channels with a high
tenth percentile caused by RFI. It also excludes
channels close to the edge of a subband which con-
tain data of low quality. It averages the remaining
channels of each subband and scales them to val-
ues between 0 and 1. To make the scaling more
robust against RFI the highest 1% of the recorded
values are ignored for the scaling and truncated to
1. To emphasize the burst signatures the values are
gamma corrected. Intermediate values between the
diﬀerent subbands are interpolated.

The LOFAR Solar Data Center (LSDC) is the
archive for LOFAR data products of the Solar KSP.
Its software is part of the Solar Imaging Pipeline
and it is located and operated at the AIP. It pro-
vides a web user interface at http://lsdc.aip.de/
to share LOFAR solar observations with the solar
science community.
It was designed for browsing
through available data, for ﬁnding speciﬁc obser-
vations and for presenting the data products in a
way that supports the identiﬁcation of solar events
and their interpretation. To serve this purpose the
LSDC is structured as follows.

8

Figure 9: LSDC page of observation L206894 providing observation details, diagnostic images and a navigation box in the
ﬁrst row. Spectra, images from other instruments and images of the individual subbands follow. All images are previews that
are linked to their full resolution version. A few solar type III bursts are visible in the dynamic radio spectrum and in the
corresponding images, which also show their location.

4.1. Main page

The LSDC is entered through the main page
shown in Fig. 8.
It shows a header with the ti-
tle, icons and a menu at the left for switching be-
tween diﬀerent observation cycles to be displayed
in the main section of the page. Currently avail-
able options are C for the commissioning cycle and
0 to 2 for the regular operation cycles. Here cy-
cle 0 is selected for the further discussion. The
main section starts with a row of three buttons.
They link to the list of available observations and to
plots of the altitudes of the solar calibration sources
(Fig. 5) and their distances to the Sun (Fig. 4). The
plots provide useful information for selecting cali-

brators for observations and the data processing.
Next a chronological table follows with the avail-
able data of the observation cycle. Each row repre-
sents one observation and its available data prod-
ucts. It starts with the observation date including
start and end time followed by the results from dif-
ferent processing strategies. Each result contains
information about the observation ID, the target
and calibrator source, possible additional informa-
tion regarding the calibration and cleaning param-
eters, the observation frequency and a preview im-
ages of the Sun and the calibrator. Each image
links to the corresponding observation page with
all related data products.

9

Figure 10: The page of subband 180 (65 MHz) of observation L206894. It can show longer periods of a single subband than
the observation page. Here the sudden brightening within seconds in the north east reveals a type III burst. The ﬁrst row is
very similar to the ﬁrst row of the observation page and has the same functionality.

4.2. Observation page

The observation pages provide access to the avail-
able data products for viewing and downloading. It
also provides a control box to browse through them.
An example is Fig. 9 which represents observation
L206894. It is organized in rows, each showing the
image sequence of a subband. However the ﬁrst
four rows are diﬀerent:

1. The ﬁrst row starts with a summary of observa-
tion speciﬁcations and a link to conﬁguration
and logﬁles from the processing. The follow-
ing ﬁve diagnostic images give an idea about
the data and calibration quality. They show
the un-calibrated data, the calibrated data, a
simulated model and the point spread function
(PSF) for the time step at the middle of the
observation. The ﬁfth image is integrated over
the complete observation period. The row ends
with the control box for browsing through the

data. It starts with four buttons to select dif-
ferent time resolutions that shows every ﬁrst,
60th, 600th and 3600th image. The drop-down
menu in the next line lets the user jump di-
rectly to a speciﬁc time range. The arrow but-
tons in the line below steps back or forward
in time. The last drop-down menu in this last
line opens the page of a selected subband in a
new window.

2. The second row shows the dynamic radio spec-
trum by LOFAR. It also provides links to
dynamic spectra from the Nancay Decameter
Array [Lecacheux, 2000], the WIND satellite
[Bougeret et al., 1995] and the Geostationary
Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES).
3. The third row serves as a time axis showing the
image numbers and recording times.
It also
contains navigation buttons to step one page
back or forward.
It repeats after every two
image rows.

10

Figure 11: The LOFAR dynamic spectrum page is useful to identify solar events such as solar radio bursts, which are clearly
visible as drifting broadband peaks. The top row provides further information and functionality explained in the text.

4. The fourth row shows extreme ultraviolet im-
ages of the lower corona from SDO [Lemen
et al., 2012] with a time resolution of minutes.
5. The ﬁfth row shows the images from the Nan-
cay Radio Heliograph [Kerdraon & Delouis,
1997] at 151 MHz with a time resolution of
10 s.

6. The sixth row shows the same time axis as the

third row.

7. From the seventh row on the LOFAR images
from the diﬀerent subbands follow with in-
creasing frequency.

The images are only previews linked to the full
resolution images. The page also contains links to
the individual subband pages and to the dynamic
spectrum page.

4.3. Subband page

The subband page shows images of a single sub-
band and so can display a longer image sequence.
This is useful for studying the temporal evolution of
a solar radio event over longer period. Fig. 10 shows
subband 180 (65 MHz) of observation L206894 as
an example. The ﬁrst row is very similar to the ﬁrst
row of the observation page and provides the same
functionality.

Figure 12: Dynamic spectrum of the channels of LOFAR
beam-formed data. This is useful to check the data for RFI.

4.4. Dynamic spectrum page

The dynamic spectrum page is shown in Fig. 11.
Its purpose is to display the LOFAR dynamic spec-
tra next to each other to cover a long time range.
This arrangement is very useful for identifying so-
lar radio bursts. Each row continues the time range
covered by the previous row. Each spectrum is only
a preview and links to its full resolution version.
The ﬁrst row shows the observation id and but-
tons with additional functionality. One provides

11

Acknowledgement

The authors would like to thank A. Warmuth,
H. ¨Onel and the LOFAR builders in particular
the LOFAR software developers G. v. Diepen, S.
Duscha, R. Fallows, G. Heald, R. Pizzo, C. Tasse,
N. Vilchey, R. v. Weeren, M. Wise, J. v. Zwieten
for supporting the development of the Solar Imag-
ing Pipeline with useful discussions and advice; the
CASA support and developers for essential imple-
mentations to CASA with respect to solar imaging;
their colleagues H. Enke, J. Klar and A. Khalatyan
from the AIP e-Science section for their support in
providing the data storage, computer cluster and
web server for the LOFAR Solar Data Center. Fi-
nancial support was provided by the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF in
the framework of the Verbundforschung, D-LOFAR
05A11BAA). LOFAR, designed and constructed by
ASTRON, has facilities in several countries that are
owned by various parties (each with their own fund-
ing sources) and are collectively operated by the
International LOFAR Telescope (ILT) foundation
under a joint scientiﬁc policy.

References

References

Bastian, T. S. 2004, Planet. Space Sci., 52, 1381
Bougeret, J.-L. et al. 1995, Space Sci. Rev., 71, 231
Breitling, F., Mann, G., & Vocks, C. 2011, Planetary, So-
lar and Heliospheric Radio Emissions (PRE VII), 373,
1511.03123

Dulk, G. A. 2000, Washington DC American Geophysical

Union Geophysical Monograph Series, 119, 115

Heald, G. et al. 2011, Journal of Astrophysics and Astron-

omy, 32, 589, 1106.3195

Kerdraon, A., & Delouis, J.-M. 1997, in Lecture Notes in
Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag, Vol. 483, Coronal Physics
from Radio and Space Observations, ed. G. Trottet, 192
Lecacheux, A. 2000, Washington DC American Geophysical

Union Geophysical Monograph Series, 119, 321

Lemen, J. R. et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 17
Mann, G. 2006, Washington DC American Geophysical

Union Geophysical Monograph Series, 165, 221

——. 2010, Landolt B¨ornstein, 216
Mann, G., Jansen, F., MacDowall, R. J., Kaiser, M. L., &

Stone, R. G. 1999, A&A, 348, 614

Mann, G., Vocks, C., & Breitling, F. 2011, Planetary, Solar

and Heliospheric Radio Emissions (PRE VII), 507

McLean, D. J. 1985, in Solar Radiophysics: Studies of Emis-
sion from the Sun at Metre Wavelengths, ed. D. J. McLean
& N. R. Labrum (Cambridge and New York, Cambridge
University Press), 37–52

McMullin, J. P., Waters, B., Schiebel, D., Young, W., &
Golap, K. 2007, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc
Conference Series, Vol. 376, Astronomical Data Analysis

Figure 13: Channel values of LOFAR beam-formed data.
Channels with values within the tenth percentile of one sub-
band and channels close to the edge of a subband (red) are
ﬂagged and removed. The remaining channels (blue) are
used to build the LOFAR dynamic spectrum.

further information about the observation settings,
two others show RFI (Fig. 12 and 13), some can
change the time resolution of the spectra and oth-
ers can select pages of a certain time range.

5. Conclusion

LOFAR is a new radio interferometer for dynamic
imaging spectroscopy that can be used for observa-
tions of the Sun. Solar observations are managed by
the LOFAR Key Science Project “Solar Physics and
Space Weather with LOFAR”, which has developed
the Solar Imaging Pipeline and the Solar Data Cen-
ter for processing the LOFAR data and providing
access to the data product by the solar physics com-
munity. The Solar Imaging Pipeline builds upon
the Standard Imaging Pipeline and diﬀers in sev-
eral ways as required by solar radio observations.
The Solar Data Center is the archive of the Solar
KSP and is located at the AIP. It provides access
to processed data from solar observations through
a web interface. The LOFAR spectra and images
of the Sun have been compared with other obser-
vations by other instruments such as the Nancay
Radio Heliograph and the Nancay Decameter Ar-
ray [Lecacheux, 2000] and good agreement has been
found. The successful veriﬁcation permits the usage
of solar LOFAR observations for scientiﬁc studies,
which will be discussed in forthcoming publications.

12

Software and Systems XVI, ed. R. A. Shaw, F. Hill, &
D. J. Bell, 127

Melrose, D. B. 1985, in Solar Radiophysics: Studies of Emis-
sion from the Sun at Metre Wavelengths, ed. D. J. McLean
& N. R. Labrum (Cambridge and New York, Cambridge
University Press), 177–210

Oﬀringa, A. R. et al. 2013, A&A, 549, A11, 1210.0393
Stappers, B. W. et al. 2011, A&A, 530, A80, 1104.1577
Suzuki, S., & Dulk, G. A. 1985, in Solar Radiophysics: Stud-
ies of Emission from the Sun at Metre Wavelengths, ed.
D. J. McLean & N. R. Labrum (Cambridge and New York,
Cambridge University Press), 289–332

Tasse, C., van der Tol, S., van Zwieten, J., van Diepen, G.,

& Bhatnagar, S. 2013, A&A, 553, A105, 1212.6178

The HDF Group. 1997-2014, Hierarchical Data Format, ver-

sion 5, http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/

van Haarlem, M. P. et al. 2013, A&A, 556, A2, 1305.3550
Warmuth, A., & Mann, G. 2005,

in Lecture Notes in
Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag, Vol. 656, Lecture Notes in
Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag, ed. K. Scherer, H. Ficht-
ner, B. Heber, & U. Mall, 49

Wild, J. P. 1950, Australian Journal of Scientiﬁc Research

A Physical Sciences, 3, 541

13

