Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. AA_2016_28274
March 22, 2016

c(cid:13)ESO 2016

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
9
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application

to globular clusters

Ruggero de Vita1, Giuseppe Bertin1, and Alice Zocchi2

1 Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Fisica, via Celoria 16, Milano 20133, Italy
2 University of Surrey, Department of Physics, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK

Accepted for publication in Astronomy & Astrophysics

ABSTRACT

Recently, a class of non-truncated radially-anisotropic models (the so-called f (ν)-models), originally constructed in the context of
violent relaxation and modeling of elliptical galaxies, has been found to possess interesting qualities in relation to observed and
simulated globular clusters. In view of new applications to globular clusters, we improve this class of models along two directions. To
make them more suitable for the description of small stellar systems hosted by galaxies, we introduce a “tidal” truncation (by means
of a procedure that guarantees full continuity of the distribution function). The new f (ν)
T -models are shown to provide a better ﬁt to
the observed photometric and spectroscopic proﬁles for a sample of 13 globular clusters studied earlier by means of non-truncated
models; interestingly, the best-ﬁt models also perform better with respect to the radial-orbit instability. Then we design a ﬂexible but
simple two-component family of truncated models, to study the separate issues of mass segregation and of multiple populations. We
do not aim at a fully realistic description of globular clusters, to compete with the description currently obtained by means of dedicated
simulations. The goal here is to try to identify the simplest models, that is, those with the smallest number of free parameters, but still
able to provide a reasonable description for clusters that are evidently beyond the reach of one-component models: with this tool we
aim at identifying the key factors that characterize mass segregation or the presence of multiple populations. To reduce the relevant
parameter space, we formulate a few physical arguments (based on recent observations and simulations). A ﬁrst application to two
well-studied globular clusters is brieﬂy described and discussed.
Key words. globular clusters: general - Stars: kinematics and dynamics - globular clusters: individual: NGC 104 (47 Tuc), NGC
5139 (omega Cen)

1. Introduction

As a zeroth-order dynamical description, a class of models (King
1966) has long and successfully been applied to globular clus-
ters (McLaughlin & van der Marel 2005; Carballo-Bello et al.
2012; Miocchi et al. 2013). Standard spherical King models are
meant to describe round, nonrotating stellar systems made of a
single stellar population, for which the role of internal two-body
relaxation has had time to act, bringing the system close to a
quasi-Maxwellian, isotropic distribution function; a truncation
is considered, to mimic the presence of tidal eﬀects. The suc-
cess of the King models is largely based on their ability to ﬁt the
observed photometric proﬁles (but see McLaughlin & van der
Marel 2005 for a photometric test in favor of models character-
ized by a milder truncation); the models are then used to infer
the general internal kinematical structure of globular clusters,
which is largely beyond the reach of direct observational tests.
In recent years, with the advent of high-resolution space and
ground-based observations, the great progress made in the ac-
quisition of detailed information on the line-of-sight and proper
motion kinematics of these stellar systems has prompted a de-
mand for more complex dynamical models. In particular, many
galactic globular clusters are known to be characterized by sig-
niﬁcant rotation (Bellazzini et al. 2012; Bianchini et al. 2013)
and/or pressure anisotropy (Watkins et al. 2015). Often, clusters
that are known to be characterized by longer relaxation times
turn out to be more anisotropic (see for example Zocchi et al.
2012, hereafter ZBV12, and Watkins et al. 2015).

Regardless of their success, King models exhibit several in-
ternal inconsistencies. The models are meant to describe tidally
truncated stellar systems, but in their original form they are
spherical, in spite of the stretching that tides are expected to
impose. The models are chosen to reﬂect the conditions of a
collisionally relaxed state, but actually, outside their half-mass
radius, globular clusters and the models themselves are associ-
ated with very long relaxation times (Harris 2010). These models
are generally applied as one-component models, that is, they are
suited to describe stellar systems made of a single homogeneous
stellar population, yet, if collisional relaxation is at work, it
should generate signiﬁcant mass segregation, with heavier stars
characterized by a distribution more concentrated than that of
lighter stars (Spitzer 1969).

Physically motivated models able to resolve some of the
above-noted inconsistencies, in relation to the shape and rota-
tion of globular clusters, have been constructed (in particular,
see Heggie & Ramamani 1995, Bertin & Varri 2008, Varri &
Bertin 2012). As to the possible presence of pressure anisotropy,
for the case of nonrotating clusters, so far most studies have
resorted to the so-called Michie-King models (Michie 1963),
which introduce signiﬁcant radial pressure in the outer parts by
multiplication of the underlying distribution function by a suit-
able angular-momentum-dependent factor (see also the models
recently proposed by Gieles & Zocchi 2015). In this general pic-
ture, we might then consider models, such as those known as
the f (ν) models, developed to represent the ﬁnal state of colli-
sionless collapse under incomplete violent relaxation and suc-

Article number, page 1 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA_2016_28274

cessfully applied to the study of bright elliptical galaxies (e.g.,
see Trenti & Bertin 2005). Even though it remains to be proved
that the formation of globular clusters, or at least of some glob-
ular clusters, follows this route, some recent investigations have
looked into this possibility.

A general trend in the direction of radial pressure in the outer
regions has been noted also in recent simulations of the evolution
of globular clusters (Tiongco et al. 2016). [Eventually, if exter-
nal tidal ﬁelds are present, the outermost regions of the cluster
may be characterized by isotropy or mild tangential anisotropy,
as also suggested by Vesperini et al. (2014).] In a recent pa-
per (ZBV12), the class of spherical f (ν) models has been used
to study a sample of Galactic globular clusters under diﬀerent
relaxation conditions and compared to the performance of the
standard spherical King models. This exploratory investigation
indicates that for some clusters the use of f (ν) models is encour-
aged, although, being non-truncated, these models are obviously
at a disadvantage in describing the outer parts of the available
photometric proﬁles. In addition, some of the best-ﬁt radially
anisotropic models thus identiﬁed actually turn out to be too
anisotropic, so that they might be prone to the radial-orbit insta-
bility (and thus not acceptable for interpreting the observations).
The ﬁrst goal of the present paper is to introduce a truncation to
the f (ν) models and to test whether this new class of models is ca-
pable of a more satisfactory ﬁt to the sample of globular clusters
studied by ZBV12.

The second objective of the paper is to extend the newly con-
structed f (ν)
T models to the case of two-component systems. For
globular clusters, there are at least two important reasons to ad-
dress more complex models of this kind.

One of the main eﬀects related to collisionality is that of
mass segregation. Thus a more realistic dynamical framework
for the modeling of globular cluster has been sought in terms of
multi-component models (e.g., see Da Costa & Freeman 1976;
Gunn & Griﬃn 1979; Merritt 1981; Miocchi 2006), which ba-
sically represent an extension of the standard King (or Michie-
King) models. Naively (i.e., in the normal context of kinetic sys-
tems), we would expect collisions to enforce a sort of equipar-
tition, in which the velocity dispersion σ of stars of mass m
should scale as σ ∼ m−1/2. The process is complicated by the
global and inhomogeneous nature of self-gravitating systems. It
has also been argued that in the core of globular clusters com-
plete equipartition cannot be achieved as a result of the so-called
Spitzer instability. In particular, Spitzer (1969) suggested that,
in a two-component system in virial equilibrium, the condition
of equipartition in the core is precluded if the total mass of the
heavy stars exceeds a certain fraction of the total mass of the
cluster. Spitzer’s criterion has been extended by Vishniac (1978)
to cover systems with a continuous distribution of masses. These
theoretical arguments have been revisited by means of recent
simulations (see Trenti & van der Marel 2013), in which only
partial equipartition is “observed” to follow from the cumula-
tive action of star-star collisions. In any case, a certain degree
of mass segregation appears to emerge from the observations of
several globular clusters (see Anderson & van der Marel 2010;
Goldsbury et al. 2013; Di Cecco et al. 2013; Bellini et al. 2014).
A second, physically separate reason to address the issue of
two-component models is given by the relatively recent ﬁnd-
ing that globular clusters host multiple stellar populations. In
many observed cases, the suggested interpretation is that clus-
ters have been the site of multiple generations of stars (see Lardo
et al. 2011; Gratton et al. 2012), so that the stars can be divided
into the groups of the ﬁrst and the second generation, and these
groups may be associated with diﬀerent dynamical properties,

Article number, page 2 of 15

such as concentration or degree of anisotropy (see Richer et al.
2013; Bellini et al. 2015).

For the second goal of the paper, that is, the construction
of two-component models of the f (ν)
form, to keep the number
T
of free parameters low, we formulate some physical hypotheses
(based on observations and/or simulations) that correspond to the
picture of mass segregation. A comparison with observed cases
should be able to support or disprove the physical assumptions
made in the modeling procedure. Our approach is complemen-
tary to that of constructing multiparameter models as diagnos-
tic tools (see Da Costa & Freeman 1976, Gunn & Griﬃn 1979,
Gieles & Zocchi 2015).

The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2 we introduce
and construct the new class of truncated anisotropic f (ν)
T models.
In Sect. 3 we extend it to the two-component case. In Sect. 4
we apply the one-component models to ﬁt a sample of 13 galac-
tic globular clusters. For NGC 5139 (ω Cen) and NGC 104 (47
Tuc), we also present the results of the ﬁts performed by means
of two-component f (ν)
T models. Finally, in Sect. 5, we draw our
conclusions.

2. One-component models
Studies of the dynamics of elliptical galaxies have investigated
the picture of galaxy formation by incomplete violent relaxation
from collisionless collapse. There are ways to translate this pic-
ture into an appropriate choice of the relevant distribution func-
tion to represent the current state of ellipticals. The choice is not
unique and various options have been explored. One particular
choice reﬂects a conjecture on the statistical foundation of the
relevant distribution function (see Stiavelli & Bertin 1987). This
is a family of partially relaxed models. The models are called
f (ν) models and their properties have been studied extensively in
more recent papers (see Bertin & Trenti 2003; Trenti et al. 2005).
They are based on the following distribution function

f (ν) = A exp−aE − d(cid:32) J2

|E|3/2(cid:33)ν/2,

where A, a, and d are positive constants. For applications, a
given value of ν ≈ 1 is usually taken as a ﬁxed parameter. Here
E = v2/2 + Φ(r) < 0 and J = |r × v| represent the speciﬁc
energy and the magnitude of the speciﬁc angular momentum of
a single star subject to a spherically symmetric mean potential
Φ(r). The self-consistent models based on this distribution func-
tion deﬁne a family of anisotropic, non-truncated models. The
following subsections are devoted to the formulation of a trun-
cated distribution function as a generalization of Eq. (1) and to
the analysis of the main dynamical properties found for the re-
sulting new classes of anisotropic truncated models.

(1)

2.1. Truncation
As also noted by Davoust (1977), the truncation prescription is
not unique (the structural properties associated with diﬀerent
types of truncation are described by Hunter 1977); indeed, the
distribution functions considered in that article diﬀer from one
another for the smoothness of their energy gradients in corre-
spondence with the energy cut-oﬀ. In this respect, we decided to
proceed to the truncation of the f (ν) models with ν = 1 in the
following way. The distribution function

A exp(cid:20)−a(E − Ee) − dJ

|E−Ee|

4(cid:21)

3

if E < Ee
if E ≥ Ee

(2)

f (ν)

T =

0

Ruggero de Vita et al.: A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application to globular clusters

for J (cid:44) 0, vanishes at the cut-oﬀ energy Ee together with all its
derivatives (the quantities A, Ee, a, and d are constants). The two-
parameter family of one-component models is then constructed
by solving the Poisson equation:

∇2Φ(r) = 4πG(cid:90) f (ν)

T d3v

(3)

0

(4)

ˆf (ν)

where

√2ξω sin ζ

0 (cid:90) √ψ

ˆf (ν)
T (ξ, ψ, ω, ζ)ω2 sin ζdζdω ,

|ω2 − ψ|3/4 ,

for the gravitational potential Φ(r). In our case, the distribution
function is anisotropic, so that the density on the right-hand side
of Eq. (3) can be reduced to a two-dimensional integral, which
depends on radius explicitly and implicitly, through the unknown
Φ(r). Thus, if we deﬁne dimensionless quantities such as the po-
tential ψ = −a(Φ − Ee), the radius ξ = a1/4dr, and the velocity
ω2 = (a/2)v2, the integral is proportional to
ˆρ(ξ, ψ) =(cid:90) π
T (ξ, ψ, ω, ζ) = 4√2π exp−ω2 + ψ −

and ζ is the angle between the position r and the velocity v of a
single star. The resulting dimensionless form of Eq. (3) is given
by
d2
dξ2 ψ +
where we have introduced the dimensionless parameter γ =
ad2/(4πGA). This diﬀerential equation is integrated under the
boundary conditions ψ(0) = Ψ and (dψ/dξ)(0) = 0 out to the
truncation radius ξtr, where the dimensionless potential vanishes.
Hence, the self-consistent problem for the dimensionless poten-
tial reduces to a family of second-order diﬀerential equations
deﬁned by two structural parameters: the central dimensionless
potential Ψ and γ. We have performed the integration of Eq. (6)
with an adaptive fourth-order Runge-Kutta method. At every in-
tegration step, the two-dimensional integral on the right-hand
side has been computed by means of the Chure routine in the
C-package Cuba (see Hahn 2015).

ψ = −

ˆρ(ξ, ψ) ,

d
dξ

(5)

(6)

1
γ

2
ξ

2.2. The parameter space
The non-truncated models are characterized by a speciﬁc rela-
tion between the parameters Ψ and γ (see the plot of γ(Ψ) in
Fig. 1 of Trenti & Bertin 2005). In particular, for a given value
of Ψ the corresponding value of γ is ﬁxed by the requirement of
a Keplerian decay of the gravitational potential (Φ ∼ −1/r) at
large radii. For the models with ν = 1, in the range 0 (cid:46) Ψ (cid:46) 15,
the function γ(Ψ) presents a pronounced peak at Ψ ≈ 5.5; for
higher values of Ψ, γ decreases, reaches about half of its peak
value at Ψ ≈ 10, and then stays approximately constant.
In our models γ is left as a free parameter. However, since,
for a given Ψ, there is a maximum value γmax beyond which
the models do not present any truncation, the parameter space is
conﬁned to the region that is under the curve γ(Ψ) found for the
non-truncated models. For a given Ψ, the non-truncated models
are recovered in the limit γ → γmax; indeed, as shown in Fig. 1,
the ratio of the truncation radius rtr to the half-mass radius rM is
an increasing function of γ.

The parameter Ψ is identiﬁed with the concentration of the
model. Another measure of the central concentration is the ra-
tio ρ(0)/ρ(rM) of the central density to the density calculated

Fig. 1. The quantity rtr/rM is plotted as a function of γ, for selected
values of Ψ.

Fig. 2. The quantity ρ(0)/ρ(rM) is plotted as a function of Ψ, for selected
values of γ.

at the half-mass radius rM. In Fig. 2 we plot this quantity as a
function of Ψ. We note that for high values of γ the relation is
non-monotonic. For 5.5 (cid:46) Ψ (cid:46) 8.5 the relation is monotonic and
characterized by a weak dependence on γ .

2.3. Intrinsic proﬁles
All the radial proﬁles of physical interest can be derived by tak-
ing moments of the distribution function f . If we consider the
natural velocity coordinate system (vr, vθ, vϕ), the velocity dis-
persion tensor is diagonal with σ2
ϕϕ. Explicitly, by deﬁn-
ing a tangential component of the velocity dispersion tensor as
σ2
T = σ2
1
2
a
2
a

ˆf (ν)
T (ξ, ψ, ω, ζ)ω4 cos2 ζ sin ζdζdω ,

ˆf (ν)
T (ξ, ψ, ω, ζ)ω4 sin3 ζdζdω ,

0 (cid:90) √ψ
ˆρ(cid:90) π
0 (cid:90) √ψ
ˆρ(cid:90) π

ϕϕ, we have

θθ = σ2

θθ + σ2

rr =

T =

(7)

(8)

σ2

σ2

1

0

0

Article number, page 3 of 15

RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersforJ,0,vanishesatthecut-o↵energyEetogetherwithallitsderivatives(thequantitiesA,Ee,a,anddareconstants).Thetwo-parameterfamilyofone-componentmodelsisthenconstructedbysolvingthePoissonequation:r2 (r)=4⇡GZf(⌫)Td3v(3)forthegravitationalpotential (r).Inourcase,thedistributionfunctionisanisotropic,sothatthedensityontheright-handsideofEq.(3)canbereducedtoatwo-dimensionalintegral,whichdependsonradiusexplicitlyandimplicitly,throughtheunknown (r).Thus,ifwedeﬁnedimensionlessquantitiessuchasthepo-tential = a(  Ee),theradius⇠=a1/4dr,andthevelocity!2=(a/2)v2,theintegralisproportionaltoˆ⇢(⇠, )=Z⇡0Zp 0ˆf(⌫)T(⇠, ,!,⇣)!2sin⇣d⇣d!,(4)whereˆf(⌫)T(⇠, ,!,⇣)=4p2⇡exp266664 !2+  p2⇠!sin⇣|!2  |3/4377775,(5)and⇣istheanglebetweenthepositionrandthevelocityvofasinglestar.TheresultingdimensionlessformofEq.(3)isgivenbyd2d⇠2 +2⇠dd⇠ = 1 ˆ⇢(⇠, ),(6)wherewehaveintroducedthedimensionlessparameter =ad2/(4⇡GA).Thisdi↵erentialequationisintegratedundertheboundaryconditions (0)= and(d /d⇠)(0)=0outtothetruncationradius⇠tr,wherethedimensionlesspotentialvanishes.Hence,theself-consistentproblemforthedimensionlesspoten-tialreducestoafamilyofsecond-orderdi↵erentialequationsdeﬁnedbytwostructuralparameters:thecentraldimensionlesspotential and .WehaveperformedtheintegrationofEq.(6)withanadaptivefourth-orderRunge-Kuttamethod.Ateveryin-tegrationstep,thetwo-dimensionalintegralontheright-handsidehasbeencomputedbymeansoftheChureroutineintheC-packageCuba(seeHahn2015).2.2.TheparameterspaceThenon-truncatedmodelsarecharacterizedbyaspeciﬁcrela-tionbetweentheparameters and (seetheplotof ( )inFig.1ofTrenti&Bertin2005).Inparticular,foragivenvalueof thecorrespondingvalueof isﬁxedbytherequirementofaKepleriandecayofthegravitationalpotential( ⇠ 1/r)atlargeradii.Forthemodelswith⌫=1,intherange0. .15,thefunction ( )presentsapronouncedpeakat ⇡5.5;forhighervaluesof , decreases,reachesabouthalfofitspeakvalueat ⇡10,andthenstaysapproximatelyconstant.Inourmodels isleftasafreeparameter.However,since,foragiven ,thereisamaximumvalue maxbeyondwhichthemodelsdonotpresentanytruncation,theparameterspaceisconﬁnedtotheregionthatisunderthecurve ( )foundforthenon-truncatedmodels.Foragiven ,thenon-truncatedmodelsarerecoveredinthelimit ! max;indeed,asshowninFig.1,theratioofthetruncationradiusrtrtothehalf-massradiusrMisanincreasingfunctionof .Theparameter isidentiﬁedwiththeconcentrationofthemodel.Anothermeasureofthecentralconcentrationisthera-tio⇢(0)/⇢(rM)ofthecentraldensitytothedensitycalculatedFig.1.Thequantityrtr/rMisplottedasafunctionof ,forselectedvaluesof .Fig.2.Thequantity⇢(0)/⇢(rM)isplottedasafunctionof ,forselectedvaluesof .atthehalf-massradiusrM.InFig.2weplotthisquantityasafunctionof .Wenotethatforhighvaluesof therelationisnon-monotonic.For5.5. .8.5therelationismonotonicandcharacterizedbyaweakdependenceon .2.3.IntrinsicproﬁlesAlltheradialproﬁlesofphysicalinterestcanbederivedbytak-ingmomentsofthedistributionfunctionf.Ifweconsiderthenaturalvelocitycoordinatesystem(vr,v✓,v'),thevelocitydis-persiontensorisdiagonalwith 2✓✓= 2''.Explicitly,bydeﬁn-ingatangentialcomponentofthevelocitydispersiontensoras 2T= 2✓✓+ 2'',wehave 2rr=2a1ˆ⇢Z⇡0Zp 0ˆf(⌫)T(⇠, ,!,⇣)!4cos2⇣sin⇣d⇣d!,(7) 2T=2a1ˆ⇢Z⇡0Zp 0ˆf(⌫)T(⇠, ,!,⇣)!4sin3⇣d⇣d!,(8)wherewehaveusedthedeﬁnitionsgiveninEqs.(4)-(5)andtherelations:v2r=v2cos2⇣andv2T=v2✓+v2'=v2sin2⇣.Forsimplic-Articlenumber,page3of14A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA_2016_28274

Fig. 3. The left frame shows the normalized density proﬁle for selected values of γ at ﬁxed Ψ; the right frame shows the normalized density proﬁle
for selected values of Ψ at ﬁxed γ.

θ + v2

T = v2

r = v2 cos2 ζ and v2

where we have used the deﬁnitions given in Eqs. (4)-(5) and the
ϕ = v2 sin2 ζ. For simplic-
relations: v2
ity, in the following we will use the notation σ2
rr. Once the
dimensionless potential proﬁle is obtained by solving the Pois-
son equation, the velocity dispersion proﬁles can be calculated
as two-dimensional integrals with the same procedure described
in Subsect. 2.1.

r = σ2

For the one-component f (ν)

T models, in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, we
plot some intrinsic proﬁles of the density and the total velocity
r + σ2
dispersion (deﬁned by σ2 = σ2

T ).

2.4. Anisotropy
A local measure of the pressure anisotropy is given by the func-
tion α(r) = 2 − σ2
r . In Fig. 5 we show some representative
anisotropy proﬁles. The models are characterized by an isotropic
core and a radially-biased anisotropic envelope.

T /σ2

The radial extent of the isotropic core can be measured by
means of the anisotropy radius rα deﬁned as the radius where
α = 1. The ratio rα/rM of the anisotropy radius to the half-mass
radius as a function of γ is shown in Fig. 6. At ﬁxed Ψ, models
with higher γ are characterized by lower values of rα/rM.

This trend is conﬁrmed by the behavior of the ratio κ =
2Kr/KT of twice the total radial kinetic energy Kr to the total
tangential kinetic energy KT , which is often used to measure the
degree of global anisotropy of the system. This parameter is re-
lated to a well-known criterion for the onset of the radial-orbit
instability (Polyachenko & Shukhman 1981): instability occurs
if κ exceeds a model-dependent threshold, κ (cid:38) 1.7 ± 0.25. Fig-
ure 7 shows the monotonic increasing dependence of κ on γ.
Therefore, truncated models are generally more isotropic than
the corresponding non-truncated models.

2.5. Virial coefﬁcient
The virial coeﬃcient (for more details see Bertin et al. 2002) can
be deﬁned as
GΥ∗L
Reσ2
0

KV =

(9)

,

Article number, page 4 of 15

Fig. 6. The ratio of the anisotropy radius rα to the half-mass radius rM
as a function of γ for selected values of Ψ. At given Ψ, models with
smaller γ are characterized by a more extended isotropic core.

where σ0 is the “central” velocity dispersion,1 Υ∗ is the stellar
mass-to-light ratio in the band used for the determination of the
luminosity L, and the eﬀective radius Re is the projected radius
of the disk containing half of the total luminosity of the cluster.
Once the best-ﬁt model for a given cluster is found from
the photometric ﬁt, the virial coeﬃcient can be calculated, and
thus used in order to infer the total dynamical mass from a mea-
surement of σ0 (under the hypothesis of a single stellar compo-
nent). This procedure is very useful, particularly for those cases
in which the kinematic proﬁles are poor or aﬀected by large un-
certainties.

1 In the following we will consider σ0 as the mean value of the line-of-
sight velocity dispersion on the cylindrical volume with projected radius
Re/8 and length 2rtr.

RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.3.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Fig.4.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .deﬁnitionof⌘isgivenafewlinesbelow).Thewayinwhichequipartitionisincorporatedisnotunique(e.g.,seeKon-dratev&Ozernoi1982).Initssimplestform,asproposedbyDaCosta&Freeman(1976),energyequipartitionissome-timesimposedbymeansofarelationbetweentheenergyscalesoftheforma2/a1=m2/m1.Hereweprefertofol-lowtheargumentofMiocchi(2006),whichrecognizesthatequipartitionisbestensuredinthecentral,morerelaxedre-gions.Ontheotherhand,giventhesupportofrecentobser-vations(seeBellinietal.2014)andsimulations(seeTrenti&vanderMarel2013),itmaybewisertorefertoonlypartialequipartition,byimposing"a2a1 (5/2, ) (3/2,a2 /a1) (3/2, ) (5/2,a2 /a1)#1/2= m1m2! ⌘.(14)Theleft-handsideoftheaboveequationrepresentstheratio 1(0)/ 2(0)ofthecentralvelocitydispersionsforthetwo-componentmodel.2Notethatatr=0theone-componentdistributionfunctionistrivial,becausethedependenceonJdropsoutand = (0),sothatEq.(14)isexpressedinclosedformintermsoftherelevantconstantsandofthecon-centrationparameter = a1[ (0) Ee].Fullequipartitionismarkedby⌘=1/2;fromtheirsimulations,alsoinviewofanargumentbySpitzer(1969),Trenti&vanderMarel(2013)suggest⌘=0.2forspeciﬁccases.Inthefollowingwewillrefertothiscaseofpartialequipartition(forarecentinvestigationonenergyequipartitioninglobularclusters,seealsoBianchinietal.2016).-Weassumethattheradialscalesthatdeﬁnethesizeoftheradiallybiasedanisotropicouterenvelopearethesameforthetwocomponents,thatisd2a1/42=d1a1/41.(15)2 istheincompletegammafunctiondeﬁnedby (s,x)=Rx0ts 1e tdt.Articlenumber,page5of14RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.3.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Fig.4.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .deﬁnitionof⌘isgivenafewlinesbelow).Thewayinwhichequipartitionisincorporatedisnotunique(e.g.,seeKon-dratev&Ozernoi1982).Initssimplestform,asproposedbyDaCosta&Freeman(1976),energyequipartitionissome-timesimposedbymeansofarelationbetweentheenergyscalesoftheforma2/a1=m2/m1.Hereweprefertofol-lowtheargumentofMiocchi(2006),whichrecognizesthatequipartitionisbestensuredinthecentral,morerelaxedre-gions.Ontheotherhand,giventhesupportofrecentobser-vations(seeBellinietal.2014)andsimulations(seeTrenti&vanderMarel2013),itmaybewisertorefertoonlypartialequipartition,byimposing"a2a1 (5/2, ) (3/2,a2 /a1) (3/2, ) (5/2,a2 /a1)#1/2= m1m2! ⌘.(14)Theleft-handsideoftheaboveequationrepresentstheratio 1(0)/ 2(0)ofthecentralvelocitydispersionsforthetwo-componentmodel.2Notethatatr=0theone-componentdistributionfunctionistrivial,becausethedependenceonJdropsoutand = (0),sothatEq.(14)isexpressedinclosedformintermsoftherelevantconstantsandofthecon-centrationparameter = a1[ (0) Ee].Fullequipartitionismarkedby⌘=1/2;fromtheirsimulations,alsoinviewofanargumentbySpitzer(1969),Trenti&vanderMarel(2013)suggest⌘=0.2forspeciﬁccases.Inthefollowingwewillrefertothiscaseofpartialequipartition(forarecentinvestigationonenergyequipartitioninglobularclusters,seealsoBianchinietal.2016).-Weassumethattheradialscalesthatdeﬁnethesizeoftheradiallybiasedanisotropicouterenvelopearethesameforthetwocomponents,thatisd2a1/42=d1a1/41.(15)2 istheincompletegammafunctiondeﬁnedby (s,x)=Rx0ts 1e tdt.Articlenumber,page5of14A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.5.Theleftframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁle↵(r)forselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Whereacurveterminates,thetruncationradiusisreached.Fig.6.Theratiooftheanisotropyradiusr↵tothehalf-massradiusrMasafunctionof forselectedvaluesof .Atgiven ,modelswithsmaller arecharacterizedbyamoreextendedisotropiccore.Thisisonlyaqualitativeargument,meanttorecognizethatoneofthepossiblecausesofradially-biasedpressureanisotropyisincompleteviolentrelaxation,whichisacol-lisionlessrelaxationprocessthatactsinthesamewayonstarsofdi↵erentmasses(seealsoGunn&Gri n1979).Forconvenienceinthenumericalcalculationofthemodels,wedecidedtoadopttheradialscaleda1/4asaproxyforthera-diusoftransitionfromisotropiccoretoanisotropicenvelope;byinspectingone-componentandtwo-componentmodels,weconﬁrmthatindeedthisscaleidentiﬁesapproximatelytheanisotropyradiusr↵.Tosummarize,ourtwo-componentmodelsdependoneightconstants.Inpractice,bytakingacommontruncationradiusandacommonpressureanisotropyscaleforthetwocomponentsandbyﬁxingthevaluesoftheratiosM1/M2,m1/m2(andof⌘),therelationsintroducedabovereducethenumberoffreeconstantstofour.TwoofthemareusedtorescalethePoissonequationtoadimensionlessform,theremainingtwodeﬁnetwoindepen-Fig.7.Globalanisotropyparameter=2Kr/KTforselectedvaluesoftheparameter .Thegreyareaindicatestheregionofthethresholdfortheonsetoftheradialorbitinstability.dentdimensionlessparameters,sothattheparameterspaceex-ploredbythefamilyoftwo-componentmodelsconsideredinthepresentstudyistwo-dimensional.Asintheone-componentmodels,weuseasindependentstructuralparametersthecentraldimensionlesspotential = a1[ (0) Ee]andtheparameter =a1d21/(4⇡GA1).3.1.MasssegregationThethirdconditionimposedintheconstructionoftwo-componentmodelsismeanttoincorporatetheroleofcollisionsinestablishingsomesortofequipartition.Itiswellknownthatthise↵ectshouldbeaccompaniedbymasssegregation,thatis,byageneraltrendofthelightercomponenttoexhibitamoredif-fusedistributionwithrespecttotheheaviercomponent.Inpar-ticular,wenotethatforourmodelsthecentraldensityratioisArticlenumber,page6of14Ruggero de Vita et al.: A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application to globular clusters

Fig. 4. The left frame shows the normalized total velocity dispersion proﬁle for selected values of γ at ﬁxed Ψ; the right frame shows the normalized
total velocity dispersion proﬁle for selected values of Ψ at ﬁxed γ.

Fig. 5. The left frame shows the anisotropy proﬁle α(r) for selected values of γ at ﬁxed Ψ; the right frame shows the anisotropy proﬁle for selected
values of Ψ at ﬁxed γ. Where a curve terminates, the truncation radius is reached.

In Fig. 8 we show the value of KV as a function of the central
dimensionless potential Ψ for selected values of γ and for the
King models. The diﬀerence between the various curves can be
signiﬁcant, particularly for low values of Ψ.

3. Two-component models
Starting from the truncated models described in the previous
subsections, we introduce the two distribution functions:

Ai exp(cid:20)−ai(E − Ei) − di

0

f (ν)

T,i (E, J) =

J

|E−Ei|3/4(cid:21)

if E < Ei
if E ≥ Ei.

(10)

Each distribution function depends on four constants Ai, ai, di, Ei
(with i = 1, 2), so that in total the solution for the self-consistent

potential Φ from the Poisson equation

∇2Φ(r) = 4πG(cid:32)(cid:90) f (ν)

T,1 d3v +(cid:90) f (ν)

T,2 d3v(cid:33)

(11)

requires a study with eight arbitrary constants. In practice, from
the point of view of dimensionless parameters, by means of
physical arguments we will reduce our investigation to a two-
parameter space; of course, if desired, we could loosen some of
the physical constraints that we are going to impose and thus
extend our discussion.

As noted in the Introduction, diﬀerent physical arguments
can motivate the study of two-component models. Here we fo-
cus on the case in which we distinguish one population of lighter
stars (let m1 be the representative mass of its individual stars and
M1 its associated total mass) from a second population of heavier
stars (with m2 > m1 and in general, M2 (cid:44) M1), so that the total

Article number, page 5 of 15

RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.3.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Fig.4.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .deﬁnitionof⌘isgivenafewlinesbelow).Thewayinwhichequipartitionisincorporatedisnotunique(e.g.,seeKon-dratev&Ozernoi1982).Initssimplestform,asproposedbyDaCosta&Freeman(1976),energyequipartitionissome-timesimposedbymeansofarelationbetweentheenergyscalesoftheforma2/a1=m2/m1.Hereweprefertofol-lowtheargumentofMiocchi(2006),whichrecognizesthatequipartitionisbestensuredinthecentral,morerelaxedre-gions.Ontheotherhand,giventhesupportofrecentobser-vations(seeBellinietal.2014)andsimulations(seeTrenti&vanderMarel2013),itmaybewisertorefertoonlypartialequipartition,byimposing"a2a1 (5/2, ) (3/2,a2 /a1) (3/2, ) (5/2,a2 /a1)#1/2= m1m2! ⌘.(14)Theleft-handsideoftheaboveequationrepresentstheratio 1(0)/ 2(0)ofthecentralvelocitydispersionsforthetwo-componentmodel.2Notethatatr=0theone-componentdistributionfunctionistrivial,becausethedependenceonJdropsoutand = (0),sothatEq.(14)isexpressedinclosedformintermsoftherelevantconstantsandofthecon-centrationparameter = a1[ (0) Ee].Fullequipartitionismarkedby⌘=1/2;fromtheirsimulations,alsoinviewofanargumentbySpitzer(1969),Trenti&vanderMarel(2013)suggest⌘=0.2forspeciﬁccases.Inthefollowingwewillrefertothiscaseofpartialequipartition(forarecentinvestigationonenergyequipartitioninglobularclusters,seealsoBianchinietal.2016).-Weassumethattheradialscalesthatdeﬁnethesizeoftheradiallybiasedanisotropicouterenvelopearethesameforthetwocomponents,thatisd2a1/42=d1a1/41.(15)2 istheincompletegammafunctiondeﬁnedby (s,x)=Rx0ts 1e tdt.Articlenumber,page5of14RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.3.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizeddensityproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Fig.4.Theleftframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowsthenormalizedtotalvelocitydispersionproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .deﬁnitionof⌘isgivenafewlinesbelow).Thewayinwhichequipartitionisincorporatedisnotunique(e.g.,seeKon-dratev&Ozernoi1982).Initssimplestform,asproposedbyDaCosta&Freeman(1976),energyequipartitionissome-timesimposedbymeansofarelationbetweentheenergyscalesoftheforma2/a1=m2/m1.Hereweprefertofol-lowtheargumentofMiocchi(2006),whichrecognizesthatequipartitionisbestensuredinthecentral,morerelaxedre-gions.Ontheotherhand,giventhesupportofrecentobser-vations(seeBellinietal.2014)andsimulations(seeTrenti&vanderMarel2013),itmaybewisertorefertoonlypartialequipartition,byimposing"a2a1 (5/2, ) (3/2,a2 /a1) (3/2, ) (5/2,a2 /a1)#1/2= m1m2! ⌘.(14)Theleft-handsideoftheaboveequationrepresentstheratio 1(0)/ 2(0)ofthecentralvelocitydispersionsforthetwo-componentmodel.2Notethatatr=0theone-componentdistributionfunctionistrivial,becausethedependenceonJdropsoutand = (0),sothatEq.(14)isexpressedinclosedformintermsoftherelevantconstantsandofthecon-centrationparameter = a1[ (0) Ee].Fullequipartitionismarkedby⌘=1/2;fromtheirsimulations,alsoinviewofanargumentbySpitzer(1969),Trenti&vanderMarel(2013)suggest⌘=0.2forspeciﬁccases.Inthefollowingwewillrefertothiscaseofpartialequipartition(forarecentinvestigationonenergyequipartitioninglobularclusters,seealsoBianchinietal.2016).-Weassumethattheradialscalesthatdeﬁnethesizeoftheradiallybiasedanisotropicouterenvelopearethesameforthetwocomponents,thatisd2a1/42=d1a1/41.(15)2 istheincompletegammafunctiondeﬁnedby (s,x)=Rx0ts 1e tdt.Articlenumber,page5of14A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.5.Theleftframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁle↵(r)forselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Whereacurveterminates,thetruncationradiusisreached.Fig.6.Theratiooftheanisotropyradiusr↵tothehalf-massradiusrMasafunctionof forselectedvaluesof .Atgiven ,modelswithsmaller arecharacterizedbyamoreextendedisotropiccore.Thisisonlyaqualitativeargument,meanttorecognizethatoneofthepossiblecausesofradially-biasedpressureanisotropyisincompleteviolentrelaxation,whichisacol-lisionlessrelaxationprocessthatactsinthesamewayonstarsofdi↵erentmasses(seealsoGunn&Gri n1979).Forconvenienceinthenumericalcalculationofthemodels,wedecidedtoadopttheradialscaleda1/4asaproxyforthera-diusoftransitionfromisotropiccoretoanisotropicenvelope;byinspectingone-componentandtwo-componentmodels,weconﬁrmthatindeedthisscaleidentiﬁesapproximatelytheanisotropyradiusr↵.Tosummarize,ourtwo-componentmodelsdependoneightconstants.Inpractice,bytakingacommontruncationradiusandacommonpressureanisotropyscaleforthetwocomponentsandbyﬁxingthevaluesoftheratiosM1/M2,m1/m2(andof⌘),therelationsintroducedabovereducethenumberoffreeconstantstofour.TwoofthemareusedtorescalethePoissonequationtoadimensionlessform,theremainingtwodeﬁnetwoindepen-Fig.7.Globalanisotropyparameter=2Kr/KTforselectedvaluesoftheparameter .Thegreyareaindicatestheregionofthethresholdfortheonsetoftheradialorbitinstability.dentdimensionlessparameters,sothattheparameterspaceex-ploredbythefamilyoftwo-componentmodelsconsideredinthepresentstudyistwo-dimensional.Asintheone-componentmodels,weuseasindependentstructuralparametersthecentraldimensionlesspotential = a1[ (0) Ee]andtheparameter =a1d21/(4⇡GA1).3.1.MasssegregationThethirdconditionimposedintheconstructionoftwo-componentmodelsismeanttoincorporatetheroleofcollisionsinestablishingsomesortofequipartition.Itiswellknownthatthise↵ectshouldbeaccompaniedbymasssegregation,thatis,byageneraltrendofthelightercomponenttoexhibitamoredif-fusedistributionwithrespecttotheheaviercomponent.Inpar-ticular,wenotethatforourmodelsthecentraldensityratioisArticlenumber,page6of14A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.5.Theleftframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁle↵(r)forselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Whereacurveterminates,thetruncationradiusisreached.Fig.6.Theratiooftheanisotropyradiusr↵tothehalf-massradiusrMasafunctionof forselectedvaluesof .Atgiven ,modelswithsmaller arecharacterizedbyamoreextendedisotropiccore.Thisisonlyaqualitativeargument,meanttorecognizethatoneofthepossiblecausesofradially-biasedpressureanisotropyisincompleteviolentrelaxation,whichisacol-lisionlessrelaxationprocessthatactsinthesamewayonstarsofdi↵erentmasses(seealsoGunn&Gri n1979).Forconvenienceinthenumericalcalculationofthemodels,wedecidedtoadopttheradialscaleda1/4asaproxyforthera-diusoftransitionfromisotropiccoretoanisotropicenvelope;byinspectingone-componentandtwo-componentmodels,weconﬁrmthatindeedthisscaleidentiﬁesapproximatelytheanisotropyradiusr↵.Tosummarize,ourtwo-componentmodelsdependoneightconstants.Inpractice,bytakingacommontruncationradiusandacommonpressureanisotropyscaleforthetwocomponentsandbyﬁxingthevaluesoftheratiosM1/M2,m1/m2(andof⌘),therelationsintroducedabovereducethenumberoffreeconstantstofour.TwoofthemareusedtorescalethePoissonequationtoadimensionlessform,theremainingtwodeﬁnetwoindepen-Fig.7.Globalanisotropyparameter=2Kr/KTforselectedvaluesoftheparameter .Thegreyareaindicatestheregionofthethresholdfortheonsetoftheradialorbitinstability.dentdimensionlessparameters,sothattheparameterspaceex-ploredbythefamilyoftwo-componentmodelsconsideredinthepresentstudyistwo-dimensional.Asintheone-componentmodels,weuseasindependentstructuralparametersthecentraldimensionlesspotential = a1[ (0) Ee]andtheparameter =a1d21/(4⇡GA1).3.1.MasssegregationThethirdconditionimposedintheconstructionoftwo-componentmodelsismeanttoincorporatetheroleofcollisionsinestablishingsomesortofequipartition.Itiswellknownthatthise↵ectshouldbeaccompaniedbymasssegregation,thatis,byageneraltrendofthelightercomponenttoexhibitamoredif-fusedistributionwithrespecttotheheaviercomponent.Inpar-ticular,wenotethatforourmodelsthecentraldensityratioisArticlenumber,page6of14A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA_2016_28274

0

(cid:82) ξtr
(cid:82) ξtr

0

- We consider two-component models in which the total
masses associated with the two components are in a given
ratio M1/M2. Reasonable values for this ratio are suggested
by models of the evolution of stellar populations, as brieﬂy
described in Appendix A. Obviously, this can be seen as a re-
quirement on the ratio of the normalization factors A1/A2. In
practice, for a globally self-consistent model this constraint
can be written as
A1a−3/2
A2a−3/2

ˆρ1ξ2dξ
ˆρ2ξ2dξ

M1
M2

(13)

=

;

1

2

(for the notation ˆρi, see Eq. (4)). For a desired mass ratio,
the equation is basically a relation for the constant A2a−3/2
in terms of A1a−3/2
, but the precise relation has to be worked
out iteratively from the global solution.

2

1

- We choose a given value for the single-mass ratio m1/m2
(reasonable values for this ratio are suggested by stellar-
population models, as described in Appendix A) and im-
pose partial energy equipartition in the central regions of
the system by means of the dimensionless parameter η = 0.2
(the deﬁnition of η is given a few lines below). The way in
which equipartition is incorporated is not unique (e.g., see
Kondratev & Ozernoi 1982). In its simplest form, as pro-
posed by Da Costa & Freeman (1976), energy equipartition
is sometimes imposed by means of a relation between the
energy scales of the form a2/a1 = m2/m1. Here we prefer
to follow the argument of Miocchi (2006), which recognizes
that equipartition is best ensured in the central, more relaxed
regions. On the other hand, given the support of recent obser-
vations (see Bellini et al. 2014) and simulations (see Trenti &
van der Marel 2013), it may be wiser to refer to only partial
equipartition, by imposing

(14)

=(cid:32) m1
m2(cid:33)−η

.

(cid:34) a2

γ (5/2, Ψ) γ (3/2, a2Ψ/a1)

γ (3/2, Ψ) γ (5/2, a2Ψ/a1)(cid:35)1/2

a1
The left-hand side of the above equation represents the ratio
σ1(0)/σ2(0) of the central velocity dispersions for the two-
component model.2 Note that at r = 0 the one-component
distribution function is trivial, because the dependence on
J drops out and Φ = Φ(0), so that Eq. (14) is expressed in
closed form in terms of the relevant constants and of the con-
centration parameter Ψ = −a1[Φ(0) − Ee]. Full equipartition
is marked by η = 1/2; from their simulations, also in view
of an argument by Spitzer (1969), Trenti & van der Marel
(2013) suggest η = 0.2 for speciﬁc cases. In the following
we will refer to this case of partial equipartition (for a recent
investigation on energy equipartition in globular clusters, see
also Bianchini et al. 2016).

.

2 = d1a1/4
1

- We assume that the radial scales that deﬁne the size of the
radially biased anisotropic outer envelope are the same for
the two components, that is
d2a1/4
(15)
This is only a qualitative argument, meant to recognize
that one of the possible causes of radially-biased pressure
anisotropy is incomplete violent relaxation, which is a colli-
sionless relaxation process that acts in the same way on stars
of diﬀerent masses (see also Gunn & Griﬃn 1979). For con-
venience in the numerical calculation of the models, we de-
cided to adopt the radial scale da1/4 as a proxy for the radius

2 γ is the incomplete gamma function deﬁned by γ(s, x) =(cid:82) x

0 ts−1e−t dt.

Fig. 7. Global anisotropy parameter κ = 2Kr/KT for selected values of
the parameter Ψ. The grey area indicates the region of the threshold for
the onset of the radial orbit instability.

Fig. 8. Virial coeﬃcient KV for selected values of γ and for the King
models.

mass of the cluster is M = M1 + M2. As for the one-component
case, we rescale the problem to a dimensionless form, by refer-
ring to a length scale and to an energy scale based on the con-
stants associated with the lighter component. In particular, we
deﬁne the dimensionless radius ξ = ra1/4
1 d1 and the dimension-
less potential ψ = −a1(Φ − E1). After such rescaling, we are left
with six independent constants. To reduce the number of param-
eters and thus to work in the simplest mathematical context, we
make the following assumptions:

- We consider a common truncation radius, that is, we take

E1 = E2 = Ee .

(12)

Such assumption is frequently made as a starting point for
the construction of multi-mass models (e.g., see Da Costa &
Freeman 1976).

Article number, page 6 of 15

A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.5.Theleftframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁle↵(r)forselectedvaluesof atﬁxed ;therightframeshowstheanisotropyproﬁleforselectedvaluesof atﬁxed .Whereacurveterminates,thetruncationradiusisreached.Fig.6.Theratiooftheanisotropyradiusr↵tothehalf-massradiusrMasafunctionof forselectedvaluesof .Atgiven ,modelswithsmaller arecharacterizedbyamoreextendedisotropiccore.Thisisonlyaqualitativeargument,meanttorecognizethatoneofthepossiblecausesofradially-biasedpressureanisotropyisincompleteviolentrelaxation,whichisacol-lisionlessrelaxationprocessthatactsinthesamewayonstarsofdi↵erentmasses(seealsoGunn&Gri n1979).Forconvenienceinthenumericalcalculationofthemodels,wedecidedtoadopttheradialscaleda1/4asaproxyforthera-diusoftransitionfromisotropiccoretoanisotropicenvelope;byinspectingone-componentandtwo-componentmodels,weconﬁrmthatindeedthisscaleidentiﬁesapproximatelytheanisotropyradiusr↵.Tosummarize,ourtwo-componentmodelsdependoneightconstants.Inpractice,bytakingacommontruncationradiusandacommonpressureanisotropyscaleforthetwocomponentsandbyﬁxingthevaluesoftheratiosM1/M2,m1/m2(andof⌘),therelationsintroducedabovereducethenumberoffreeconstantstofour.TwoofthemareusedtorescalethePoissonequationtoadimensionlessform,theremainingtwodeﬁnetwoindepen-Fig.7.Globalanisotropyparameter=2Kr/KTforselectedvaluesoftheparameter .Thegreyareaindicatestheregionofthethresholdfortheonsetoftheradialorbitinstability.dentdimensionlessparameters,sothattheparameterspaceex-ploredbythefamilyoftwo-componentmodelsconsideredinthepresentstudyistwo-dimensional.Asintheone-componentmodels,weuseasindependentstructuralparametersthecentraldimensionlesspotential = a1[ (0) Ee]andtheparameter =a1d21/(4⇡GA1).3.1.MasssegregationThethirdconditionimposedintheconstructionoftwo-componentmodelsismeanttoincorporatetheroleofcollisionsinestablishingsomesortofequipartition.Itiswellknownthatthise↵ectshouldbeaccompaniedbymasssegregation,thatis,byageneraltrendofthelightercomponenttoexhibitamoredif-fusedistributionwithrespecttotheheaviercomponent.Inpar-ticular,wenotethatforourmodelsthecentraldensityratioisArticlenumber,page6of14RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.8.Virialcoe cientKVforselectedvaluesof andfortheKingmodels.givenby⇢1(0)⇢2(0)=A1A2 a2a1!3/2e  (3/2, )ea2 /a1 (3/2,a2 /a1),(16)which,undertheconditionslistedintheprevioussubsection,wouldbeexpectedtofallbelowunityfromasimplepictureofmasssegregation(inwhichthecentralpartsshouldbedom-inatedbytheheaviercomponent).AswenotedinSubsect.2.2,whenweintroducedthecon-centrationparameter fortheone-componentmodels,thereareseveralwaysofdescribingtheconcentrationofagivendensityproﬁle.Here,weillustratetheresultofdi↵erentdeﬁnitionsthatmaybeadopted.InFig.9weplottheratiorM1/rM2ofthehalf-massradiiofthetwocomponentsandtheratioofthequantitiesassociatedwiththeparameterillustratedinFig.2,thatis,ofthedensitycontrastofthelightercomponent⇢1(0)/⇢1(rM1)tothatoftheheaviercomponent⇢2(0)/⇢2(rM2),asafunctionof ,forselectedvaluesof .TheratiorM1/rM2exceedsunityforallthemodelsconsideredandthusitisthemorenaturalparametertobeusedtodescribetherelativeconcentrationofthetwocompo-nents.Inordertohighlighthowdi↵erenttypesofmasssegrega-tioncanresultfromtheconditionofpartialenergyequiparti-tionimposedonourmodels,wereportthecasesoftwoselectedglobularclusters:47Tucand!Cen.Wehavefoundthetwo-componentdynamicalmodelsthatbestreproducetheobservedphotometricandkinematicproﬁlesofthetwoclusters.InFig.10weplotthedensityproﬁlesofthetwobest-ﬁtmodelsfoundbytheprocedureinwhichRedGiantstarsarenotincludedamongtheheavystars(foradiscussionofthisﬁttingprocedure,seethenextsection).Thebest-ﬁtmodelof47Tucischaracterizedbyadensityproﬁlewithalargerdensityofheavystarsinthecentralregions.Indeed,thisisthetypeofmasssegregationtraditionallyassociatedwiththetendencyofthesystemtoestablishenergyequipartition.Themodelof!Cenexhibitsaqualitativelydi↵er-entmassdistribution.Inthenextsection,devotedtosettingthecorrespondencebetweendynamicalmodelsandobservations,webrieﬂydescribehowmasssegregationhasacounterpartinthegradientoftheproﬁleofthecumulativemass-to-lightratio,deﬁnedasthetotalmass-to-lightratioforasphereofgivenradiusr.Fig.9.Relativeconcentrationofthetwocomponentsasafunctionof ,forselectedvaluesof .TheuppersetofcurvesrepresentstheratiorM1/rM2ofthehalf-massradiusofthelightercomponenttothehalf-massradiusoftheheaviercomponent.Thelowersetrepresentstheratioofthedensity-contrastparameters.4.FittingthedatawithdynamicalmodelsWehaveperformedacombinedphotometricandkinematicﬁttothedataavailableforasetofglobularclusters,followingaproce-dureverysimilartothatusedinZBV12.Inthepresentanalysiswehavedecidedtominimizeacombinedchi-squarefunction,whichisdeﬁnedasthesumofthephotometricandthekine-maticcontributions.Di↵erentlyfromtheﬁtsreportedinZBV12bymeansofone-componentnon-truncatedf(⌫)models,theﬁtspresentedhere,basedonthef(⌫)Tmodels,arecharacterizedbyoneadditionalparameter( )strictlyconnectedwiththetrun-cation.4.1.Theissueofthemass-to-lightratios4.1.1.Mass-to-lightratiosforone-componentmodelsIntheapplicationofone-componentmodels,wefollowthegen-eralassumptionthataconstantmass-to-lightratioadequatelydescribesthestellarpopulation,imaginedtobehomogeneous.Thisassumptionallowsustoconvertprojectedmassdensities⌃(R)intosurfaceluminositydensitiesl(R)bymeansofasimplerelationofproportionality.Then,themass-to-lightratioisfoundasoneoftheparametersdeterminedbytheﬁt(seeAppendixBofZBV12).4.1.2.Mass-to-lightratiosfortwo-componentmodelsIngeneral,forthetwo-componentmodelsweconsiderthesur-faceluminosityproﬁleasthesumoftwocontributions:l(R)=⌃1(R)✓ML◆ 11+⌃2(R)✓ML◆ 12.(17)Then,wehaveperformedtwodi↵erenttypesofﬁt:(i)Intheﬁrstprocedure,weconsidertheheaviercomponentmadeofonlydarkremnants.Therefore,theﬁtissimilartothatforellipticalgalaxiesinthepresenceofadarkmattercomponent.Inotherwords,thephotometricﬁtiscarriedoutbyomittingthe⌃2-terminEq.(17).ThenthekinematicﬁtisArticlenumber,page7of14Ruggero de Vita et al.: A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application to globular clusters

of transition from isotropic core to anisotropic envelope; by
inspecting one-component and two-component models, we
conﬁrm that indeed this scale identiﬁes approximately the
anisotropy radius rα.
To summarize, our two-component models depend on eight
constants. In practice, by taking a common truncation radius and
a common pressure anisotropy scale for the two components and
by ﬁxing the values of the ratios M1/M2, m1/m2 (and of η), the
relations introduced above reduce the number of free constants
to four. Two of them are used to rescale the Poisson equation
to a dimensionless form, the remaining two deﬁne two indepen-
dent dimensionless parameters, so that the parameter space ex-
plored by the family of two-component models considered in
the present study is two-dimensional. As in the one-component
models, we use as independent structural parameters the central
dimensionless potential Ψ = −a1[Φ(0) − Ee] and the parameter
γ = a1d2

1/(4πGA1).

3.1. Mass segregation
The third condition imposed in the construction of
two-
component models is meant to incorporate the role of collisions
in establishing some sort of equipartition. It is well known that
this eﬀect should be accompanied by mass segregation, that is,
by a general trend of the lighter component to exhibit a more dif-
fuse distribution with respect to the heavier component. In par-
ticular, we note that for our models the central density ratio is
given by

,

(16)

A1

A2(cid:32) a2
a1(cid:33)3/2

eΨγ (3/2, Ψ)

ea2Ψ/a1 γ (3/2, a2Ψ/a1)

ρ1(0)
ρ2(0) =
which, under the conditions listed in the previous subsection,
would be expected to fall below unity from a simple picture of
mass segregation (in which the central parts should be dominated
by the heavier component).

As we noted in Subsect. 2.2, when we introduced the con-
centration parameter Ψ for the one-component models, there are
several ways of describing the concentration of a given density
proﬁle. Here, we illustrate the result of diﬀerent deﬁnitions that
may be adopted. In Fig. 9 we plot the ratio rM1/rM2 of the half-
mass radii of the two components and the ratio of the quantities
associated with the parameter illustrated in Fig. 2, that is, of the
density contrast of the lighter component ρ1(0)/ρ1(rM1) to that
of the heavier component ρ2(0)/ρ2(rM2), as a function of Ψ, for
selected values of γ. The ratio rM1/rM2 exceeds unity for all the
models considered and thus it is the more natural parameter to
be used to describe the relative concentration of the two compo-
nents.

In order to highlight how diﬀerent types of mass segrega-
tion can result from the condition of partial energy equiparti-
tion imposed on our models, we report the cases of two selected
globular clusters: 47 Tuc and ω Cen. We have found the two-
component dynamical models that best reproduce the observed
photometric and kinematic proﬁles of the two clusters. In Fig. 10
we plot the density proﬁles of the two best-ﬁt models found by
the procedure in which Red Giant stars are not included among
the heavy stars (for a discussion of this ﬁtting procedure, see the
next section). The best-ﬁt model of 47 Tuc is characterized by a
density proﬁle with a larger density of heavy stars in the central
regions. Indeed, this is the type of mass segregation traditionally
associated with the tendency of the system to establish energy
equipartition. The model of ω Cen exhibits a qualitatively diﬀer-
ent mass distribution.

Fig. 9. Relative concentration of the two components as a function of
Ψ, for selected values of γ. The upper set of curves represents the ratio
rM1/rM2 of the half-mass radius of the lighter component to the half-
mass radius of the heavier component. The lower set represents the ratio
of the density-contrast parameters.

In the next section, devoted to setting the correspondence
between dynamical models and observations, we brieﬂy describe
how mass segregation has a counterpart in the gradient of the
proﬁle of the cumulative mass-to-light ratio, deﬁned as the total
mass-to-light ratio for a sphere of given radius r.

4. Fitting the data with dynamical models
We have performed a combined photometric and kinematic ﬁt to
the data available for a set of globular clusters, following a proce-
dure very similar to that used in ZBV12. In the present analysis
we have decided to minimize a combined chi-square function,
which is deﬁned as the sum of the photometric and the kine-
matic contributions. Diﬀerently from the ﬁts reported in ZBV12
by means of one-component non-truncated f (ν) models, the ﬁts
presented here, based on the f (ν)
T models, are characterized by
one additional parameter (γ) strictly connected with the trunca-
tion.

4.1. The issue of the mass-to-light ratios

4.1.1. Mass-to-light ratios for one-component models
In the application of one-component models, we follow the gen-
eral assumption that a constant mass-to-light ratio adequately
describes the stellar population, imagined to be homogeneous.
This assumption allows us to convert projected mass densities
Σ(R) into surface luminosity densities l(R) by means of a simple
relation of proportionality. Then, the mass-to-light ratio is found
as one of the parameters determined by the ﬁt (see Appendix B
of ZBV12).

4.1.2. Mass-to-light ratios for two-component models
In general, for the two-component models we consider the sur-
face luminosity proﬁle as the sum of two contributions:

l(R) = Σ1(R)(cid:18) M
L(cid:19)−1

1

+ Σ2(R)(cid:18) M
L(cid:19)−1

2

.

(17)

Article number, page 7 of 15

RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.8.Virialcoe cientKVforselectedvaluesof andfortheKingmodels.givenby⇢1(0)⇢2(0)=A1A2 a2a1!3/2e  (3/2, )ea2 /a1 (3/2,a2 /a1),(16)which,undertheconditionslistedintheprevioussubsection,wouldbeexpectedtofallbelowunityfromasimplepictureofmasssegregation(inwhichthecentralpartsshouldbedom-inatedbytheheaviercomponent).AswenotedinSubsect.2.2,whenweintroducedthecon-centrationparameter fortheone-componentmodels,thereareseveralwaysofdescribingtheconcentrationofagivendensityproﬁle.Here,weillustratetheresultofdi↵erentdeﬁnitionsthatmaybeadopted.InFig.9weplottheratiorM1/rM2ofthehalf-massradiiofthetwocomponentsandtheratioofthequantitiesassociatedwiththeparameterillustratedinFig.2,thatis,ofthedensitycontrastofthelightercomponent⇢1(0)/⇢1(rM1)tothatoftheheaviercomponent⇢2(0)/⇢2(rM2),asafunctionof ,forselectedvaluesof .TheratiorM1/rM2exceedsunityforallthemodelsconsideredandthusitisthemorenaturalparametertobeusedtodescribetherelativeconcentrationofthetwocompo-nents.Inordertohighlighthowdi↵erenttypesofmasssegrega-tioncanresultfromtheconditionofpartialenergyequiparti-tionimposedonourmodels,wereportthecasesoftwoselectedglobularclusters:47Tucand!Cen.Wehavefoundthetwo-componentdynamicalmodelsthatbestreproducetheobservedphotometricandkinematicproﬁlesofthetwoclusters.InFig.10weplotthedensityproﬁlesofthetwobest-ﬁtmodelsfoundbytheprocedureinwhichRedGiantstarsarenotincludedamongtheheavystars(foradiscussionofthisﬁttingprocedure,seethenextsection).Thebest-ﬁtmodelof47Tucischaracterizedbyadensityproﬁlewithalargerdensityofheavystarsinthecentralregions.Indeed,thisisthetypeofmasssegregationtraditionallyassociatedwiththetendencyofthesystemtoestablishenergyequipartition.Themodelof!Cenexhibitsaqualitativelydi↵er-entmassdistribution.Inthenextsection,devotedtosettingthecorrespondencebetweendynamicalmodelsandobservations,webrieﬂydescribehowmasssegregationhasacounterpartinthegradientoftheproﬁleofthecumulativemass-to-lightratio,deﬁnedasthetotalmass-to-lightratioforasphereofgivenradiusr.Fig.9.Relativeconcentrationofthetwocomponentsasafunctionof ,forselectedvaluesof .TheuppersetofcurvesrepresentstheratiorM1/rM2ofthehalf-massradiusofthelightercomponenttothehalf-massradiusoftheheaviercomponent.Thelowersetrepresentstheratioofthedensity-contrastparameters.4.FittingthedatawithdynamicalmodelsWehaveperformedacombinedphotometricandkinematicﬁttothedataavailableforasetofglobularclusters,followingaproce-dureverysimilartothatusedinZBV12.Inthepresentanalysiswehavedecidedtominimizeacombinedchi-squarefunction,whichisdeﬁnedasthesumofthephotometricandthekine-maticcontributions.Di↵erentlyfromtheﬁtsreportedinZBV12bymeansofone-componentnon-truncatedf(⌫)models,theﬁtspresentedhere,basedonthef(⌫)Tmodels,arecharacterizedbyoneadditionalparameter( )strictlyconnectedwiththetrun-cation.4.1.Theissueofthemass-to-lightratios4.1.1.Mass-to-lightratiosforone-componentmodelsIntheapplicationofone-componentmodels,wefollowthegen-eralassumptionthataconstantmass-to-lightratioadequatelydescribesthestellarpopulation,imaginedtobehomogeneous.Thisassumptionallowsustoconvertprojectedmassdensities⌃(R)intosurfaceluminositydensitiesl(R)bymeansofasimplerelationofproportionality.Then,themass-to-lightratioisfoundasoneoftheparametersdeterminedbytheﬁt(seeAppendixBofZBV12).4.1.2.Mass-to-lightratiosfortwo-componentmodelsIngeneral,forthetwo-componentmodelsweconsiderthesur-faceluminosityproﬁleasthesumoftwocontributions:l(R)=⌃1(R)✓ML◆ 11+⌃2(R)✓ML◆ 12.(17)Then,wehaveperformedtwodi↵erenttypesofﬁt:(i)Intheﬁrstprocedure,weconsidertheheaviercomponentmadeofonlydarkremnants.Therefore,theﬁtissimilartothatforellipticalgalaxiesinthepresenceofadarkmattercomponent.Inotherwords,thephotometricﬁtiscarriedoutbyomittingthe⌃2-terminEq.(17).ThenthekinematicﬁtisArticlenumber,page7of14A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA_2016_28274

Fig. 10. The left frame shows the density proﬁles of each component and the total density proﬁle for the best-ﬁt model of 47 Tuc (NGC 104),
obtained by the procedure in which RG stars are not included in the heavy component (see text); the right frame shows the corresponding density
proﬁles for the best-ﬁt model of ω Cen (NGC 5139).

Then, we have performed two diﬀerent types of ﬁt:

(i) In the ﬁrst procedure, we consider the heavier component
made of only dark remnants. Therefore, the ﬁt is similar to
that for elliptical galaxies in the presence of a dark matter
component. In other words, the photometric ﬁt is carried out
by omitting the Σ2-term in Eq. (17). Then the kinematic ﬁt is
performed by considering only the velocity dispersion proﬁle
relative to the lighter component, which is the only compo-
nent assumed to be visible.

(ii) In the second type of ﬁt, we include the Red Giant stars
(RGs) in the group of the heavier stars (see Appendix A). In
this case, in the photometric ﬁt both components contribute
to the surface brightness. Thus, we have explored two pos-
sible options: either (a) to assign a reasonable value for the
ratio (M/L)1/(M/L)2, based on the fraction of luminosity ex-
pected to come from the RGs and the main-sequence stars
present in the system; or (b) to leave the mass-to-light ratio
of the heavier component to be determined as a parameter of
the best-ﬁt model, and thus to make a prediction on the num-
ber of RGs contained in the system. In this paper we report
only the results given by option (a), as the best-ﬁt models
found with the other option tend to underestimate the con-
tribution of RGs present in globular clusters.3 In this pro-
cedure the kinematic ﬁt considers the heavier component as
the kinematic tracer, because most kinematic data come from
spectroscopic observations of RGs (i.e., the line-of-sight ve-
locities of RG stars are usually those that are detected for the
construction of the observed velocity dispersion proﬁles).

Note that, for the two-component models, the conversion
from density proﬁles to luminosity proﬁles is not straightfor-
ward as in the one-component case, because it depends on the
structural characteristics of the system. In particular, it reﬂects
the interconnection between mass segregation and the gradients

3 Typically, RGs are estimated to provide ≈ 60% of the total V-band
luminosity and ≈ 0.5% of the total mass of a globular cluster; these
values have been computed by evolving a set of stars with masses dis-
tributed according to the Kroupa IMF by means of the SSE package
(Hurley et al. 2000)

Article number, page 8 of 15

of mass-to-light ratios. In Fig. 11, we plot the cumulative mass-
to-light ratio for two selected globular clusters in their central
regions; the behavior of this quantity as a function of the intrin-
sic radius r changes according to the type of ﬁt considered. On
the one hand, in the case in which RGs are not included in the
heavier component, the ratio M/L decreases with r (for the more
relaxed cluster 47 Tuc, this trend is more evident). On the other
hand, the case in which RGs are included in the heavier compo-
nent (and in the ﬁtting procedure) is characterized by a mild in-
crease of the cumulative mass-to-light ratio. For the former case
we recover a behavior of the cumulative mass-to-light ratio pro-
ﬁle similar to that found by van den Bosch et al. (2006) for the
globular cluster M15 (NGC 7078); they suggest that the gradient
of the ratio M/L at small radii is likely to be due to the presence
of a centrally concentrated population of dark remnants, an in-
terpretation that is also suited to describe the result of our ﬁt.

We wish to emphasize that in this paper we are not aiming
at providing improved dynamical models for selected clusters.
Rather, we wish to demonstrate, by means of the mathemati-
cally simplest framework, how diﬀerent ways of using a multi-
component dynamical model actually lead to diﬀerent pictures
of the internal structure of globular clusters, especially in rela-
tion to mass segregation and gradients of mass-to-light ratios.

4.2. Fits with one-component models

The data sets considered in this paper are the same as used by
ZBV12. For convenience, in Table 1 we report some distinctive
quantities for the sample of 13 Galactic GCs selected for this
paper.

In Fig. 12 we show the best-ﬁt surface brightness and ve-
locity dispersion proﬁles for 3 of the selected GCs, which are
displayed in order of increasing core relaxation time. The di-
mensionless parameters of the ﬁts and the values of the reduced
chi-squared are listed in Table 2. For the statistical analysis we
have followed the procedure used by ZBV12. From an inspec-
tion of the way the best-ﬁt models are identiﬁed, we note that
the present models are characterized by signiﬁcant degeneracy
in parameter space: this is a natural consequence of the intro-
duction of the additional parameter related to the truncation.

A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.10.Theleftframeshowsthedensityproﬁlesofeachcomponentandthetotaldensityproﬁleforthebest-ﬁtmodelof47Tuc(NGC104),obtainedbytheprocedureinwhichRGstarsarenotincludedintheheavycomponent(seetext);therightframeshowsthecorrespondingdensityproﬁlesforthebest-ﬁtmodelof!Cen(NGC5139).performedbyconsideringonlythevelocitydispersionproﬁlerelativetothelightercomponent,whichistheonlycompo-nentassumedtobevisible.(ii)Inthesecondtypeofﬁt,weincludetheRedGiantstars(RGs)inthegroupoftheheavierstars(seeAppendixA).Inthiscase,inthephotometricﬁtbothcomponentscontributetothesurfacebrightness.Thus,wehaveexploredtwopos-sibleoptions:either(a)toassignareasonablevaluefortheratio(M/L)1/(M/L)2,basedonthefractionofluminosityex-pectedtocomefromtheRGsandthemain-sequencestarspresentinthesystem;or(b)toleavethemass-to-lightratiooftheheaviercomponenttobedeterminedasaparameterofthebest-ﬁtmodel,andthustomakeapredictiononthenum-berofRGscontainedinthesystem.Inthispaperwereportonlytheresultsgivenbyoption(a),asthebest-ﬁtmodelsfoundwiththeotheroptiontendtounderestimatethecon-tributionofRGspresentinglobularclusters.3Inthispro-cedurethekinematicﬁtconsiderstheheaviercomponentasthekinematictracer,becausemostkinematicdatacomefromspectroscopicobservationsofRGs(i.e.,theline-of-sightve-locitiesofRGstarsareusuallythosethataredetectedfortheconstructionoftheobservedvelocitydispersionproﬁles).Notethat,forthetwo-componentmodels,theconversionfromdensityproﬁlestoluminosityproﬁlesisnotstraightfor-wardasintheone-componentcase,becauseitdependsonthestructuralcharacteristicsofthesystem.Inparticular,itreﬂectstheinterconnectionbetweenmasssegregationandthegradientsofmass-to-lightratios.InFig.11,weplotthecumulativemass-to-lightratiofortwoselectedglobularclustersintheircentralregions;thebehaviorofthisquantityasafunctionoftheintrin-sicradiusrchangesaccordingtothetypeofﬁtconsidered.Ontheonehand,inthecaseinwhichRGsarenotincludedintheheaviercomponent,theratioM/Ldecreaseswithr(forthemorerelaxedcluster47Tuc,thistrendismoreevident).Ontheother3Typically,RGsareestimatedtoprovide⇡60%ofthetotalV-bandluminosityand⇡0.5%ofthetotalmassofaglobularcluster;thesevalueshavebeencomputedbyevolvingasetofstarswithmassesdis-tributedaccordingtotheKroupaIMFbymeansoftheSSEpackage(Hurleyetal.2000)hand,thecaseinwhichRGsareincludedintheheaviercompo-nent(andintheﬁttingprocedure)ischaracterizedbyamildin-creaseofthecumulativemass-to-lightratio.Fortheformercasewerecoverabehaviorofthecumulativemass-to-lightratiopro-ﬁlesimilartothatfoundbyvandenBoschetal.(2006)fortheglobularclusterM15(NGC7078);theysuggestthatthegradientoftheratioM/Latsmallradiiislikelytobeduetothepresenceofacentrallyconcentratedpopulationofdarkremnants,anin-terpretationthatisalsosuitedtodescribetheresultofourﬁt.Wewishtoemphasizethatinthispaperwearenotaimingatprovidingimproveddynamicalmodelsforselectedclusters.Rather,wewishtodemonstrate,bymeansofthemathemati-callysimplestframework,howdi↵erentwaysofusingamulti-componentdynamicalmodelactuallyleadtodi↵erentpicturesoftheinternalstructureofglobularclusters,especiallyinrela-tiontomasssegregationandgradientsofmass-to-lightratios.4.2.Fitswithone-componentmodelsThedatasetsconsideredinthispaperarethesameasusedbyZBV12.Forconvenience,inTable1wereportsomedistinctivequantitiesforthesampleof13GalacticGCsselectedforthispaper.InFig.12weshowthebest-ﬁtsurfacebrightnessandve-locitydispersionproﬁlesfor3oftheselectedGCs,whicharedisplayedinorderofincreasingcorerelaxationtime.Thedi-mensionlessparametersoftheﬁtsandthevaluesofthereducedchi-squaredarelistedinTable2.ForthestatisticalanalysiswehavefollowedtheprocedureusedbyZBV12.Fromaninspec-tionofthewaythebest-ﬁtmodelsareidentiﬁed,wenotethatthepresentmodelsarecharacterizedbysigniﬁcantdegener-acyinparameterspace:thisisanaturalconsequenceoftheintroductionoftheadditionalparameterrelatedtothetrun-cation.Ingeneral,thephotometricﬁtsbythef(⌫)TmodelsaremoresatisfactorythanthoseperformedbymeansoftheKingandf(⌫)models,foreveryrelaxationclassconsidered(foracomparisonofthevaluesofthereducedchi-squared,seeTable4inZBV12);indeed,forthemajorityoftheclusters,theminimumchi-squaredisinsidethe90%conﬁdenceinterval.Theimprovementwithre-Articlenumber,page8of14A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.10.Theleftframeshowsthedensityproﬁlesofeachcomponentandthetotaldensityproﬁleforthebest-ﬁtmodelof47Tuc(NGC104),obtainedbytheprocedureinwhichRGstarsarenotincludedintheheavycomponent(seetext);therightframeshowsthecorrespondingdensityproﬁlesforthebest-ﬁtmodelof!Cen(NGC5139).performedbyconsideringonlythevelocitydispersionproﬁlerelativetothelightercomponent,whichistheonlycompo-nentassumedtobevisible.(ii)Inthesecondtypeofﬁt,weincludetheRedGiantstars(RGs)inthegroupoftheheavierstars(seeAppendixA).Inthiscase,inthephotometricﬁtbothcomponentscontributetothesurfacebrightness.Thus,wehaveexploredtwopos-sibleoptions:either(a)toassignareasonablevaluefortheratio(M/L)1/(M/L)2,basedonthefractionofluminosityex-pectedtocomefromtheRGsandthemain-sequencestarspresentinthesystem;or(b)toleavethemass-to-lightratiooftheheaviercomponenttobedeterminedasaparameterofthebest-ﬁtmodel,andthustomakeapredictiononthenum-berofRGscontainedinthesystem.Inthispaperwereportonlytheresultsgivenbyoption(a),asthebest-ﬁtmodelsfoundwiththeotheroptiontendtounderestimatethecon-tributionofRGspresentinglobularclusters.3Inthispro-cedurethekinematicﬁtconsiderstheheaviercomponentasthekinematictracer,becausemostkinematicdatacomefromspectroscopicobservationsofRGs(i.e.,theline-of-sightve-locitiesofRGstarsareusuallythosethataredetectedfortheconstructionoftheobservedvelocitydispersionproﬁles).Notethat,forthetwo-componentmodels,theconversionfromdensityproﬁlestoluminosityproﬁlesisnotstraightfor-wardasintheone-componentcase,becauseitdependsonthestructuralcharacteristicsofthesystem.Inparticular,itreﬂectstheinterconnectionbetweenmasssegregationandthegradientsofmass-to-lightratios.InFig.11,weplotthecumulativemass-to-lightratiofortwoselectedglobularclustersintheircentralregions;thebehaviorofthisquantityasafunctionoftheintrin-sicradiusrchangesaccordingtothetypeofﬁtconsidered.Ontheonehand,inthecaseinwhichRGsarenotincludedintheheaviercomponent,theratioM/Ldecreaseswithr(forthemorerelaxedcluster47Tuc,thistrendismoreevident).Ontheother3Typically,RGsareestimatedtoprovide⇡60%ofthetotalV-bandluminosityand⇡0.5%ofthetotalmassofaglobularcluster;thesevalueshavebeencomputedbyevolvingasetofstarswithmassesdis-tributedaccordingtotheKroupaIMFbymeansoftheSSEpackage(Hurleyetal.2000)hand,thecaseinwhichRGsareincludedintheheaviercompo-nent(andintheﬁttingprocedure)ischaracterizedbyamildin-creaseofthecumulativemass-to-lightratio.Fortheformercasewerecoverabehaviorofthecumulativemass-to-lightratiopro-ﬁlesimilartothatfoundbyvandenBoschetal.(2006)fortheglobularclusterM15(NGC7078);theysuggestthatthegradientoftheratioM/Latsmallradiiislikelytobeduetothepresenceofacentrallyconcentratedpopulationofdarkremnants,anin-terpretationthatisalsosuitedtodescribetheresultofourﬁt.Wewishtoemphasizethatinthispaperwearenotaimingatprovidingimproveddynamicalmodelsforselectedclusters.Rather,wewishtodemonstrate,bymeansofthemathemati-callysimplestframework,howdi↵erentwaysofusingamulti-componentdynamicalmodelactuallyleadtodi↵erentpicturesoftheinternalstructureofglobularclusters,especiallyinrela-tiontomasssegregationandgradientsofmass-to-lightratios.4.2.Fitswithone-componentmodelsThedatasetsconsideredinthispaperarethesameasusedbyZBV12.Forconvenience,inTable1wereportsomedistinctivequantitiesforthesampleof13GalacticGCsselectedforthispaper.InFig.12weshowthebest-ﬁtsurfacebrightnessandve-locitydispersionproﬁlesfor3oftheselectedGCs,whicharedisplayedinorderofincreasingcorerelaxationtime.Thedi-mensionlessparametersoftheﬁtsandthevaluesofthereducedchi-squaredarelistedinTable2.ForthestatisticalanalysiswehavefollowedtheprocedureusedbyZBV12.Fromaninspec-tionofthewaythebest-ﬁtmodelsareidentiﬁed,wenotethatthepresentmodelsarecharacterizedbysigniﬁcantdegener-acyinparameterspace:thisisanaturalconsequenceoftheintroductionoftheadditionalparameterrelatedtothetrun-cation.Ingeneral,thephotometricﬁtsbythef(⌫)TmodelsaremoresatisfactorythanthoseperformedbymeansoftheKingandf(⌫)models,foreveryrelaxationclassconsidered(foracomparisonofthevaluesofthereducedchi-squared,seeTable4inZBV12);indeed,forthemajorityoftheclusters,theminimumchi-squaredisinsidethe90%conﬁdenceinterval.Theimprovementwithre-Articlenumber,page8of14Ruggero de Vita et al.: A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application to globular clusters

Fig. 11. The cumulative mass-to-light ratio as a function of the intrinsic radius r for the best-ﬁt models of two globular clusters. The best-ﬁt models
are found by means of two diﬀerent procedures, that is, by taking the heavier component as made of only dark remnants or by including in the
heavier component the presence of Red Giants. The vertical lines indicate the position of the total half-mass radius.

Table 1. Selected sample of globular clusters.

Table 2. Best-ﬁt parameters for the one-component models.

Globular cluster
NGC 362
NGC 7078 (M15)
NGC 104 (47 Tuc)
NGC 6121 (M4)
NGC 6341 (M92)
NGC 6218 (M12)
NGC 6254 (M10)
NGC 6656 (M22)
NGC 3201
NGC 6809 (M55)
NGC 288
NGC 5139 (ω Cen)
NGC 2419

d(cid:12)
8.6
10.4
4.5
2.2
8.3
4.8
4.4
3.2
4.9
5.4
8.9
5.2
82.6

log Tc
7.76
7.84
7.84
7.90
7.96
8.19
8.21
8.53
8.61
8.90
8.99
9.60
9.87

log TM
8.93
9.32
9.55
8.93
9.02
8.87
8.90
9.23
9.27
9.29
9.32
10.09
10.63

Np
239
310
231
228
118
143
162
143
80
114
85
72
137

Nk
8
35
16
10
8
11
6
7
16
13
6
37
6

NGC
(1)
104
288
362
2419
3201
5139
6121
6218
6254
6341
6656
6809
7078

Ψ
(2)

8.59 ± 0.01
4.76 ± 0.13
7.32 ± 0.03
5.55 ± 0.06
5.61 ± 0.17
4.81 ± 0.08
7.38 ± 0.07
5.60 ± 0.09
5.62 ± 0.9
7.41 ± 0.02
6.37 ± 0.13
3.75 ± 0.09
8.43 ± 0.01

γ
(3)

19.2 ± 0.5
4.52 ± 0.17
47.2 ± 1.6
58 ± 2
31.7 ± 5
27.6 ± 1.6
4.07 ± 0.2
18.0 ± 1.1
46 ± 1.6
18.2 ± 0.8
12.7 ± 4
8.0 ± 0.23
46.6 ± 0.25

˜χ2
ph
(4)
1.14
1.26
1.19
1.15
1.14
3.05
1.35
1.12
4.69
6.43
1.03
1.15
3.72

˜χ2
k
(5)
11.33
0.89
2.39
0.54
2.74
2.45
0.54
0.68
0.60
2.96
1.18
2.00
2.07

Notes. For each globular cluster the following quantities are recorded:
distance from the Sun (kpc); logarithm of the core relaxation time
(years); logarithm of the half-mass relaxation time (years); number of
points in the surface brightness proﬁle; and number of points in the ve-
locity dispersion proﬁle (adapted from ZBV12).

Notes. For each cluster, in Cols. (2) and (3) we provide the best-ﬁt pa-
rameters that deﬁne the dynamical models, together with their formal
errors. We then list the values of the photometric reduced chi-square
˜χ2
ph (Col. 4) and the kinematic reduced chi-square ˜χ2

k (Col.5).

In general, the photometric ﬁts by the f (ν)

T models are more
satisfactory than those performed by means of the King and f (ν)
models, for every relaxation class considered (for a comparison
of the values of the reduced chi-squared, see Table 4 in ZBV12);
indeed, for the majority of the clusters, the minimum chi-squared
is inside the 90% conﬁdence interval. The improvement with re-
spect to the King and the f (ν) models is mainly related to the
outer regions of the system, where the truncation of our models
accommodates well the observed brightness proﬁles.

In addition, the general trends found by ZBV12 for the non-
truncated models are not aﬀected by the truncation signiﬁcantly.
In particular, our models remain able to reproduce the central
peak in the velocity dispersion proﬁles that is characteristic of
the least relaxed clusters in the sample (NGC 2419 and NGC
5139).

In Table 3 we report the values of the truncation radius rtr,
the projected core radius Rc (that is the radial location where the
surface brightness equals half its central value), and the intrinsic
half-mass radius rM. Then we list other relevant quantities, in
particular, the total mass M, the central density ρ0, and the V-
band mass-to-light ratio (M/L)V. For our anisotropic models we
have also calculated the intrinsic anisotropy radius rα deﬁned as
the radius where α(rα) = 1 and the global anisotropy parameter
κ (see Subsect. 2.4).

4.2.1. A comparison with the King models

No systematic trends are found. The only exception is repre-
sented by the truncation radius, which is generally larger for the
f (ν)
T models, in line with the general ﬁnding that the photomet-
Article number, page 9 of 15

RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.11.Thecumulativemass-to-lightratioasafunctionoftheintrinsicradiusrforthebest-ﬁtmodelsoftwoglobularclusters.Thebest-ﬁtmodelsarefoundbymeansoftwodi↵erentprocedures,thatis,bytakingtheheaviercomponentasmadeofonlydarkremnantsorbyincludingintheheaviercomponentthepresenceofRedGiants.Theverticallinesindicatethepositionofthetotalhalf-massradius.Table1.Selectedsampleofglobularclusters.Globularclusterd logTclogTMNpNkNGC3628.67.768.932398NGC7078(M15)10.47.849.3231035NGC104(47Tuc)4.57.849.5523116NGC6121(M4)2.27.908.9322810NGC6341(M92)8.37.969.021188NGC6218(M12)4.88.198.8714311NGC6254(M10)4.48.218.901626NGC6656(M22)3.28.539.231437NGC32014.98.619.278016NGC6809(M55)5.48.909.2911413NGC2888.98.999.32856NGC5139(!Cen)5.29.6010.097237NGC241982.69.8710.631376Notes.Foreachglobularclusterthefollowingquantitiesarerecorded:distancefromtheSun(kpc);logarithmofthecorerelaxationtime(years);logarithmofthehalf-massrelaxationtime(years);numberofpointsinthesurfacebrightnessproﬁle;andnumberofpointsintheve-locitydispersionproﬁle(adaptedfromZBV12).specttotheKingandthef(⌫)modelsismainlyrelatedtotheouterregionsofthesystem,wherethetruncationofourmodelsaccommodateswelltheobservedbrightnessproﬁles.Inaddition,thegeneraltrendsfoundbyZBV12forthenon-truncatedmodelsarenota↵ectedbythetruncationsigniﬁcantly.Inparticular,ourmodelsremainabletoreproducethecentralpeakinthevelocitydispersionproﬁlesthatischaracteristicoftheleastrelaxedclustersinthesample(NGC2419andNGC5139).InTable3wereportthevaluesofthetruncationradiusrtr,theprojectedcoreradiusRc(thatistheradiallocationwherethesurfacebrightnessequalshalfitscentralvalue),andtheintrinsichalf-massradiusrM.Thenwelistotherrelevantquantities,inparticular,thetotalmassM,thecentraldensity⇢0,andtheV-bandmass-to-lightratio(M/L)V.ForouranisotropicmodelsweTable2.Best-ﬁtparametersfortheone-componentmodels.NGC  ˜ 2ph˜ 2k(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)1048.59±0.0119.2±0.51.1411.332884.76±0.134.52±0.171.260.893627.32±0.0347.2±1.61.192.3924195.55±0.0658±21.150.5432015.61±0.1731.7±51.142.7451394.81±0.0827.6±1.63.052.4561217.38±0.074.07±0.21.350.5462185.60±0.0918.0±1.11.120.6862545.62±0.946±1.64.690.6063417.41±0.0218.2±0.86.432.9666566.37±0.1312.7±41.031.1868093.75±0.098.0±0.231.152.0070788.43±0.0146.6±0.253.722.07Notes.Foreachcluster,inCols.(2)and(3)weprovidethebest-ﬁtpa-rametersthatdeﬁnethedynamicalmodels,togetherwiththeirformalerrors.Wethenlistthevaluesofthephotometricreducedchi-square˜ 2ph(Col.4)andthekinematicreducedchi-square˜ 2k(Col.5).havealsocalculatedtheintrinsicanisotropyradiusr↵deﬁnedastheradiuswhere↵(r↵)=1andtheglobalanisotropyparameter(seeSubsect.2.4).4.2.1.AcomparisonwiththeKingmodelsNosystematictrendsarefound.Theonlyexceptionisrepre-sentedbythetruncationradius,whichisgenerallylargerforthef(⌫)Tmodels,inlinewiththegeneralﬁndingthatthephotomet-ricproﬁlesappeartopossessasmoothertruncationthanthatofKingmodels(seeMcLaughlin&vanderMarel2005).Articlenumber,page9of14RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.11.Thecumulativemass-to-lightratioasafunctionoftheintrinsicradiusrforthebest-ﬁtmodelsoftwoglobularclusters.Thebest-ﬁtmodelsarefoundbymeansoftwodi↵erentprocedures,thatis,bytakingtheheaviercomponentasmadeofonlydarkremnantsorbyincludingintheheaviercomponentthepresenceofRedGiants.Theverticallinesindicatethepositionofthetotalhalf-massradius.Table1.Selectedsampleofglobularclusters.Globularclusterd logTclogTMNpNkNGC3628.67.768.932398NGC7078(M15)10.47.849.3231035NGC104(47Tuc)4.57.849.5523116NGC6121(M4)2.27.908.9322810NGC6341(M92)8.37.969.021188NGC6218(M12)4.88.198.8714311NGC6254(M10)4.48.218.901626NGC6656(M22)3.28.539.231437NGC32014.98.619.278016NGC6809(M55)5.48.909.2911413NGC2888.98.999.32856NGC5139(!Cen)5.29.6010.097237NGC241982.69.8710.631376Notes.Foreachglobularclusterthefollowingquantitiesarerecorded:distancefromtheSun(kpc);logarithmofthecorerelaxationtime(years);logarithmofthehalf-massrelaxationtime(years);numberofpointsinthesurfacebrightnessproﬁle;andnumberofpointsintheve-locitydispersionproﬁle(adaptedfromZBV12).specttotheKingandthef(⌫)modelsismainlyrelatedtotheouterregionsofthesystem,wherethetruncationofourmodelsaccommodateswelltheobservedbrightnessproﬁles.Inaddition,thegeneraltrendsfoundbyZBV12forthenon-truncatedmodelsarenota↵ectedbythetruncationsigniﬁcantly.Inparticular,ourmodelsremainabletoreproducethecentralpeakinthevelocitydispersionproﬁlesthatischaracteristicoftheleastrelaxedclustersinthesample(NGC2419andNGC5139).InTable3wereportthevaluesofthetruncationradiusrtr,theprojectedcoreradiusRc(thatistheradiallocationwherethesurfacebrightnessequalshalfitscentralvalue),andtheintrinsichalf-massradiusrM.Thenwelistotherrelevantquantities,inparticular,thetotalmassM,thecentraldensity⇢0,andtheV-bandmass-to-lightratio(M/L)V.ForouranisotropicmodelsweTable2.Best-ﬁtparametersfortheone-componentmodels.NGC  ˜ 2ph˜ 2k(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)1048.59±0.0119.2±0.51.1411.332884.76±0.134.52±0.171.260.893627.32±0.0347.2±1.61.192.3924195.55±0.0658±21.150.5432015.61±0.1731.7±51.142.7451394.81±0.0827.6±1.63.052.4561217.38±0.074.07±0.21.350.5462185.60±0.0918.0±1.11.120.6862545.62±0.946±1.64.690.6063417.41±0.0218.2±0.86.432.9666566.37±0.1312.7±41.031.1868093.75±0.098.0±0.231.152.0070788.43±0.0146.6±0.253.722.07Notes.Foreachcluster,inCols.(2)and(3)weprovidethebest-ﬁtpa-rametersthatdeﬁnethedynamicalmodels,togetherwiththeirformalerrors.Wethenlistthevaluesofthephotometricreducedchi-square˜ 2ph(Col.4)andthekinematicreducedchi-square˜ 2k(Col.5).havealsocalculatedtheintrinsicanisotropyradiusr↵deﬁnedastheradiuswhere↵(r↵)=1andtheglobalanisotropyparameter(seeSubsect.2.4).4.2.1.AcomparisonwiththeKingmodelsNosystematictrendsarefound.Theonlyexceptionisrepre-sentedbythetruncationradius,whichisgenerallylargerforthef(⌫)Tmodels,inlinewiththegeneralﬁndingthatthephotomet-ricproﬁlesappeartopossessasmoothertruncationthanthatofKingmodels(seeMcLaughlin&vanderMarel2005).Articlenumber,page9of14A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA_2016_28274

Fig. 12. Photometric and kinematic ﬁts for three globular clusters of the sample. Each cluster is representative of its relaxation class as identiﬁed
by the core relaxation time Tc (for NGC 6341, log Tc ≈ 7.96; for NGC 6656, log Tc ≈ 8.53; for NGC 2419 log Tc ≈ 9.87). The curves represent
the surface brightness proﬁle (left panels) and the velocity dispersion proﬁle (right panels) calculated by means of dynamical models. In particular,
dotted lines correspond to King models; dashed lines to the non-truncated f (ν) models, and solid lines to the f (ν)
T models. In all panels, the dots are
the observed data. For each data-point, errors are shown as vertical bars; in the case of the velocity dispersion proﬁle, the horizontal bars indicate
the size of the the radial bin used to calculate each data point. The King proﬁles, the f (ν) proﬁles, and the observed data are taken from ZBV12.

Article number, page 10 of 15

A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.12.Photometricandkinematicﬁtsforthreeglobularclustersofthesample.EachclusterisrepresentativeofitsrelaxationclassasidentiﬁedbythecorerelaxationtimeTc(forNGC6341,logTc⇡7.96;forNGC6656,logTc⇡8.53;forNGC2419logTc⇡9.87).Thecurvesrepresentthesurfacebrightnessproﬁle(leftpanels)andthevelocitydispersionproﬁle(rightpanels)calculatedbymeansofdynamicalmodels.Inparticular,dottedlinescorrespondtoKingmodels;dashedlinestothenon-truncatedf(⌫)models,andsolidlinestothef(⌫)Tmodels.Inallpanels,thedotsaretheobserveddata.Foreachdata-point,errorsareshownasverticalbars;inthecaseofthevelocitydispersionproﬁle,thehorizontalbarsindicatethesizeofthetheradialbinusedtocalculateeachdatapoint.TheKingproﬁles,thef(⌫)proﬁles,andtheobserveddataaretakenfromZBV12.Articlenumber,page10of14A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.12.Photometricandkinematicﬁtsforthreeglobularclustersofthesample.EachclusterisrepresentativeofitsrelaxationclassasidentiﬁedbythecorerelaxationtimeTc(forNGC6341,logTc⇡7.96;forNGC6656,logTc⇡8.53;forNGC2419logTc⇡9.87).Thecurvesrepresentthesurfacebrightnessproﬁle(leftpanels)andthevelocitydispersionproﬁle(rightpanels)calculatedbymeansofdynamicalmodels.Inparticular,dottedlinescorrespondtoKingmodels;dashedlinestothenon-truncatedf(⌫)models,andsolidlinestothef(⌫)Tmodels.Inallpanels,thedotsaretheobserveddata.Foreachdata-point,errorsareshownasverticalbars;inthecaseofthevelocitydispersionproﬁle,thehorizontalbarsindicatethesizeofthetheradialbinusedtocalculateeachdatapoint.TheKingproﬁles,thef(⌫)proﬁles,andtheobserveddataaretakenfromZBV12.Articlenumber,page10of14A&Aproofs:manuscriptno.main_postFig.12.Photometricandkinematicﬁtsforthreeglobularclustersofthesample.EachclusterisrepresentativeofitsrelaxationclassasidentiﬁedbythecorerelaxationtimeTc(forNGC6341,logTc⇡7.96;forNGC6656,logTc⇡8.53;forNGC2419logTc⇡9.87).Thecurvesrepresentthesurfacebrightnessproﬁle(leftpanels)andthevelocitydispersionproﬁle(rightpanels)calculatedbymeansofdynamicalmodels.Inparticular,dottedlinescorrespondtoKingmodels;dashedlinestothenon-truncatedf(⌫)models,andsolidlinestothef(⌫)Tmodels.Inallpanels,thedotsaretheobserveddata.Foreachdata-point,errorsareshownasverticalbars;inthecaseofthevelocitydispersionproﬁle,thehorizontalbarsindicatethesizeofthetheradialbinusedtocalculateeachdatapoint.TheKingproﬁles,thef(⌫)proﬁles,andtheobserveddataaretakenfromZBV12.Articlenumber,page10of14Ruggero de Vita et al.: A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application to globular clusters

Table 4. Dimensionless best-ﬁt parameters for the two-component mod-
els.

Table 5. Derived physical parameters from the best-ﬁt two-component
models.

NGC 104

RG no RG
7.00
7.12
36.25
12.5
4.89
1.61
8.87
22.23

NGC 5139
RG
4.00
22.50
1.89
2.26

no RG
4.00
26.25
5.61
3.23

Ψ
γ
˜χ2
ph
˜χ2
k

Notes. For two clusters considered either by including or by not includ-
ing RG stars in the heavier component, we provide the best-ﬁt param-
eters that deﬁne the dynamical models (Ψ, γ). We then list the values
of the reduced photometric chi-square ˜χ2
ph and the reduced kinematic
chi-square ˜χ2
k.

ric proﬁles appear to possess a smoother truncation than that of
King models (see McLaughlin & van der Marel 2005).

4.2.2. Radial-orbit instability

One of the points noted in the analysis by ZBV12 is a general
concern about the possible occurrence of the radial-orbit insta-
bility. Polyachenko & Shukhman (1981) argued that this insta-
bility would occur when the anisotropy parameter κ = 2Kr/KT ,
the ratio of the radial contribution to the tangential contribution
to the total kinetic energy, exceeds 1.7 ± 0.25.
In this respect, for some of the globular clusters considered
by ZBV12 (e.g., NGC 6254) the non-truncated f (ν) models might
not be applicable. The truncation in our f (ν)
T models tends to re-
duce the global value of the radial contribution to the kinetic en-
ergy (see Fig. 7), bringing κ down to values typically associated
with stability. Of course, a test by N-body simulations would be
desired to conﬁrm this point, but obviously this would bring us
well beyond the goals of the present paper.

4.3. Fits with two-component models

As anticipated in the previous sections, in order to address the
issue of mass segregation in the simplest mathematical frame-
work, we have studied the performance of our two-component
models in ﬁtting two globular clusters characterized by diﬀer-
ent relaxation conditions: 47 Tuc (NGC 104) and ω Cen (NGC
5139).

The photometric and kinematic ﬁts for these clusters are pre-
sented in Fig. 13. The ﬁts are performed by means of the two
procedures outlined in Subsect. 4.1. In particular, for the proce-
dure in which RGs are included in the heavier component, we
have assumed that RGs contribute 60% of the total luminosity of
the cluster in the V-band.

As in the previous subsection, we report the best-ﬁt param-
eters (see Table 4) and some relevant physical quantities (see
Table 5).

The two-component models appear to provide good ﬁts to
the observed proﬁles, thus supporting the hypotheses imposed
in their construction. For both clusters the ﬁts performed with
the procedure that includes RG stars in the heavier component
appear to be better. This is particularly evident for the case of
47 Tuc, for which the best-ﬁt model corresponding to the case
without RGs in the heavier component does not reproduce the
kinematic proﬁle adequately. We then argue that the role of the

NGC 104

NGC 5139

RG no RG RG no RG
71
34.1
21.1
8.7
3.3
7.0
2.3
4.3
4.8
3.76
0.83

90
176
133
11.7
7.9
25.6
8.5
3.19
3.11
5.31
1.18

89
155
117
10.4
7.0
22.7
7.5
3.30
3.21
1.53

/

153
16.3
10.2
5.2
1.8
5.5
1.8
5.1
5.6
1.13

/

rtr
Rc,1
Rc,2
rM,1
rM,2
M1
M2
log ρ0,1
log ρ0,2
(M/L)V,1
(M/L)V,2

Notes. For two clusters considered either by including or by not includ-
ing RG stars in the heavier component, we provide the relevant physical
quantities relative to the light component 1 and the heavy component 2.
The truncation radius rtr and the half-mass radius are expressed in pc;
the core radius Rc is expressed in units of arcsec. The total mass is ex-
pressed in units of 105 M(cid:12) and the central mass density ρ0 in M(cid:12) pc−3.
Finally, the mass-to-light ratio is given in solar units M(cid:12)/L(cid:12)

stars used as kinematic tracer becomes important when we con-
sider more relaxed environments. In turn, the ﬁt to ω Cen sug-
gests that its stellar population is reasonably homogeneous and
mass segregation is probably negligible.

5. Conclusions and perspectives
In this paper we have constructed a new class of truncated
anisotropic models as an extension of the so-called f (ν) mod-
els, introduced by Stiavelli & Bertin (1987) to describe ellipti-
cal galaxies interpreted as the result of incomplete violent relax-
ation. Such f (ν)
T models have been applied to perform a combined
photometric and kinematic study of a sample of Galactic globu-
lar clusters.

In the ﬁrst part of the paper, we have constructed one-
component truncated models, to describe a stellar system made
of a single homogeneous stellar population. From our analysis,
the new class of models is found to be well suited to describe the
globular clusters of a sample studied earlier. We have compared
our ﬁts with those performed for the same sample of globular
clusters by ZBV12 by means of King and f (ν) models. In gen-
eral, the new truncated models represent the surface brightness
proﬁles better, especially in the outer parts of the systems. In ad-
dition, the models tend to reproduce the inner parts of the veloc-
ity dispersion proﬁles better than the King models. As also noted
by ZBV12, this is probably related to the role played by radially-
biased pressure anisotropy in partially relaxed clusters. In the
f (ν) and in the f (ν)
T models, such radial anisotropy is a signature
of the process of incomplete violent relaxation, which may have
occurred during the initial stages of the evolution of globular
clusters; of course, we should be aware that other mechanisms
may be responsible for radially-biased pressure anisotropy. In
contrast to some cases found earlier by application of the non-
truncated f (ν) models, the f (ν)
T models identiﬁed by the ﬁts appear
to be stable with respect to the radial-orbit instability.

In the second part of the paper, we have extended our anal-
ysis by constructing a family of two-component models, with

Article number, page 11 of 15

Table 3. Derived physical parameters from the best-ﬁt one-component models.

A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA_2016_28274

NGC
104
288
362
2419
3201
5139
6121
6218
6254
6341
6656
6809
7078

rtr

Rc

*

rM

M

log ρ0

(M/L)V

2336
896
897
517
1533
2861
3144
982
1126
724
2057
1072
560

3641
835
1600
1163
2278
3549
2555
1105
2191
900
2224
1084
4289

22.6
79.42
9.88
18.58
71.58
127.68
71.31
47.81
50.02
14.18
80.92
110.09
7.51

22.09
77.32
10.75
20.20
74.77
163.53
69.49
50.26
51.16
14.42
80.74
109.23
5.46

5.60
7.50
2.65
26.17
5.12
10.02
3.69
3.29
3.31
3.12
4.18
5.90
2.97

5.22
7.53
2.26
23.89
5.03
10.24
3.72
3.22
3.18
2.96
4.17
5.89
2.88

7.18
0.74
1.87
7.84
1.31
26.45
0.65
0.61
1.53
2.86
2.08
0.60
3.98

7.77
0.76
1.81
9.50
1.10
31.16
0.66
0.66
1.72
3.39
2.14
0.60
3.95

5.01
2.04
4.83
1.87
3.01
3.54
3.66
3.31
3.74
4.63
3.64
2.21
5.21

5.09
2.09
4.78
1.90
2.98
3.39
3.68
3.31
3.80
4.71
3.65
2.24
5.54

1.34
1.88
1.05
1.72
1.91
1.93
1.10
1.96
1.61
1.83
1.11
1.12
1.12

1.63
2.20
1.09
2.17
1.99
2.87
1.20
1.50
2.09
2.15
1.11
1.14
1.22

rα

13.98
23.82
5.35
42.85
11.29
19.83
17.52
8.57
6.32
9.51
13.95
12.55
5.62

κ

1.20
1.61
1.26
1.38
1.28
1.34
1.10
1.22
1.33
1.18
1.16
1.29
1.28

Notes. For each cluster listed in the ﬁrst column, in double-column form we provide the relevant physical quantities derived from the King models
(as reported in ZBV12 - left columns) and from our truncated anisotropic models f (ν)
(right columns). In single-column form, as last items, we
T
provide the anisotropy radius for the best-ﬁt f (ν)
T models and the global anisotropy parameter κ. The truncation radius rtr and the core radius are
expressed in units of arcsec; the intrinsic half-mass radius and the anisotropy radius in pc. The total mass is expressed in units of 105 M(cid:12) and the
central mass density ρ0 in M(cid:12) pc−3. Finally, the mass-to-light ratio is given in solar units M(cid:12)/L(cid:12).
(*) Most values of the half-mass radii for the King models reported in ZBV12 are incorrect; in the present paper we report the corrected values.

the aim of characterizing in the simplest way a stellar system
made of stars with diﬀerent masses. In fact, if some collisional-
ity is present, stars of diﬀerent masses are expected to diﬀer in
their dynamical evolution, by exhibiting phenomena associated
with equipartition and mass segregation. In particular, we have
assumed that the stellar system under consideration is made of
only dark remnants and main sequence stars, with the possible
inclusion of Red Giant stars. RG stars would naturally belong
to the component of heavier stars, but obviously diﬀer from the
heavy dark remnants from the point of view of their visibility.
This raises an interesting modeling problem, that is, the question
of the optimal comparison between the two-component models
thus constructed and the available photometric and kinematic
data. To explore the relevant underlying modeling issues, the
new two-component models have been tested on two globular
clusters characterized by diﬀerent relaxation conditions. They
generally provide satisfactory ﬁts to the observed photometric
and kinematic proﬁles, in particular when RGs are included in
the ﬁtting procedure, by considering their contribution as heavy
stars to the photometric proﬁle and their role in tracing the kine-
matics of the clusters. Interestingly, from our two-component
models only the more relaxed cluster (47 Tuc) exhibits the sig-
nature of mass segregation in a prominent way.

The two-component models that we have introduced address
the eﬀects induced by collisionality on stars characterized by
diﬀerent masses. This is only one particular application of two-
component models. We plan to consider soon the construction
of two-component models aimed at addressing the issue of dark
matter in globular clusters and of others able to touch on the
issue of the recently observed multiple stellar populations (gen-
erally thought to represent diﬀerent episodes of star formation;
see Gratton et al. 2012).

Acknowledgements. We would like to thank A.L. Varri and D. Heggie for help-
ful suggestions and M. Trenti for useful conversations about the topics addressed
in this paper. We are also grateful to S. Degl’Innocenti and to P.G. Prada Moroni
for discussions related to the properties of stellar populations in globular clus-
ters. AZ thanks M. Gieles and V. Hénault-Brunet for many interesting discus-
sions. This work was partially supported by the Italian MIUR. AZ acknowledges
ﬁnancial support from the Royal Society (Newton International Fellowship).

Article number, page 12 of 15

References
Anderson, J. & van der Marel, R. P. 2010, ApJ, 710, 1032
Bellazzini, M., Bragaglia, A., Carretta, E., et al. 2012, A&A, 538, A18
Bellini, A., Anderson, J., van der Marel, R. P., et al. 2014, ApJ, 797, 115
Bellini, A., Vesperini, E., Piotto, G., et al. 2015, ApJ, 810, L13
Bertin, G., Ciotti, L., & Del Principe, M. 2002, A&A, 386, 149
Bertin, G. & Trenti, M. 2003, ApJ, 584, 729
Bertin, G. & Varri, A. L. 2008, ApJ, 689, 1005
Bianchini, P., van de Ven, G., Norris, M. A., Schinnerer, E., & Varri, A. L. 2016,

ArXiv e-prints [arXiv:1603.00878]

Bianchini, P., Varri, A. L., Bertin, G., & Zocchi, A. 2013, ApJ, 772, 67
Carballo-Bello, J. A., Gieles, M., Sollima, A., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 14
Da Costa, G. S. & Freeman, K. C. 1976, ApJ, 206, 128
Davoust, E. 1977, A&A, 61, 391
Di Cecco, A., Zocchi, A., Varri, A. L., et al. 2013, AJ, 145, 103
Gieles, M. & Zocchi, A. 2015, MNRAS, 454, 576
Gill, M., Trenti, M., Miller, M. C., et al. 2008, ApJ, 686, 303
Goldsbury, R., Heyl, J., & Richer, H. 2013, ApJ, 778, 57
Gratton, R. G., Carretta, E., & Bragaglia, A. 2012, A&A Rev., 20, 50
Gunn, J. E. & Griﬃn, R. F. 1979, AJ, 84, 752
Hahn, T. 2015, Computer Physics Communications, 168, 78
Harris, W. E. 2010, ArXiv e-prints [arXiv:1012.3224]
Heggie, D. C. & Ramamani, N. 1995, MNRAS, 272, 317
Hunter, C. 1977, AJ, 82, 271
Hurley, J. R., Pols, O. R., & Tout, C. A. 2000, MNRAS, 315, 543
King, I. R. 1966, AJ, 71, 64
Kondratev, B. P. & Ozernoi, L. M. 1982, Ap&SS, 84, 431
Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Lardo, C., Bellazzini, M., Pancino, E., et al. 2011, A&A, 525, A114
McLaughlin, D. E. & van der Marel, R. P. 2005, ApJS, 161, 304
Merritt, D. 1981, AJ, 86, 318
Michie, R. W. 1963, MNRAS, 125, 127
Miller, G. E. & Scalo, J. M. 1979, ApJS, 41, 513
Miocchi, P. 2006, MNRAS, 366, 227
Miocchi, P., Lanzoni, B., Ferraro, F. R., et al. 2013, ApJ, 774, 151
Polyachenko, V. L. & Shukhman, I. G. 1981, Soviet Ast., 25, 533
Richer, H. B., Heyl, J., Anderson, J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 771, L15
Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Spitzer, Jr., L. 1969, ApJ, 158, L139
Stiavelli, M. & Bertin, G. 1987, MNRAS, 229, 61
Tiongco, M. A., Vesperini, E., & Varri, A. L. 2016, MNRAS, 455, 3693
Trenti, M. & Bertin, G. 2005, A&A, 429, 161
Trenti, M., Bertin, G., & van Albada, T. S. 2005, A&A, 433, 57
Trenti, M. & van der Marel, R. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 3272
van den Bosch, R., de Zeeuw, T., Gebhardt, K., Noyola, E., & van de Ven, G.

2006, ApJ, 641, 852

Varri, A. L. & Bertin, G. 2012, A&A, 540, A94
Vesperini, E., Varri, A. L., McMillan, S. L. W., & Zepf, S. E. 2014, MNRAS,

Vishniac, E. T. 1978, ApJ, 223, 986
Watkins, L. L., van der Marel, R. P., Bellini, A., & Anderson, J. 2015, ApJ, 803,

443, L79

29

Zocchi, A., Bertin, G., & Varri, A. L. 2012, A&A, 539, A65, (ZBV12)

Ruggero de Vita et al.: A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application to globular clusters

Fig. 13. Photometric and kinematic ﬁts for NGC 104 and NGC 5139. The curves represent the surface brightness proﬁle (left panels) and the
velocity dispersion proﬁle (right panels) calculated by means of two-component models in two ways: by taking the heavier component as made of
only dark remnants or by including in the heavier component the presence of Red Giants.

Article number, page 13 of 15

RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.13.PhotometricandkinematicﬁtsforNGC104andNGC5139.Thecurvesrepresentthesurfacebrightnessproﬁle(leftpanels)andthevelocitydispersionproﬁle(rightpanels)calculatedbymeansoftwo-componentmodelsintwoways:bytakingtheheaviercomponentasmadeofonlydarkremnantsorbyincludingintheheaviercomponentthepresenceofRedGiants.Watkins,L.L.,vanderMarel,R.P.,Bellini,A.,&Anderson,J.2015,ApJ,803,29Zocchi,A.,Bertin,G.,&Varri,A.L.2012,A&A,539,A65,(ZBV12)AppendixA:Darkremnants,RedGiants,andmain-sequencestarsInthepresentstudy,wehavesimpliﬁedthediscussionofthestructureofasystemmadeofstarsofdi↵erentmassesbygroup-ingthevariousstarsintotwocomponents,lightstarsofmassm1(andtotalassociatedmassM1)andheavystarsofmassm2(andtotalassociatedmassM2).Realglobularclustersareextremelycomplex,becausetheycontainnotonlystarswithbasicallyacontinuousspectrumofmasses,butalsoobjects,suchasbinarystars,thatfalloutsidetheparadigmoftheequationstradition-allyusedinstellardynamics.Themaingoalofthisappendixistodetermine“reasonable"estimatesforthemassratiosm2/m1andM2/M1tobeusedinouridealizedmodels,asintroducedinSect.3.Mostoftheobjectsthatarenaturallyassignedtotheheav-iercomponent(andcollectivelyshouldmakemostofthemassM2)areoftencalled“darkremnants".Infact,whitedwarfs,neu-tronstars,andblackholesarenotexpectedtocontributemuchtothesurfacebrightnessproﬁleofthecluster.Inturn,mostofthemassM1isexpectedtobemadeoflow-mass(typicallybe-low0.5M )main-sequencestars.Thereremainsathirdclassofstars,theRedGiantstars,whichareexpectedtobelongtotheheaviercomponent(becausetheirmassisthoughttobeintherange0.7 0.8M ,verysimilartotheaveragemassoftheremnants;seebelow),withonlyminorcontributiontoM2;yet,theyareexpectedtocontributesigniﬁcantlytotheobservedsur-facebrightnessand,importantly,aregenerallyusedaskinematictracers,inthesensethattheyarethemainsourceofthekine-maticdatapointscollectedbyspectroscopicobservations.Themodelingofglobularclustersaddressedinthispaperisthussig-niﬁcantlydi↵erentfromthatusedinthetwo-componentdescrip-tionofellipticalgalaxies,forwhichonecomponentrepresentstheluminouscollisionlessstellarsystemandtheothercompo-nentthedarkmatterhalo;still,anelementofanalogyexists,be-causeinbothcasesthestructuralproﬁlesofself-consistenttwo-componentmodelsaregenerallydi↵erentfromthoseofone-componentmodels.Articlenumber,page13of14RuggerodeVitaetal.:Aclassofspherical,truncated,anisotropicmodelsforapplicationtoglobularclustersFig.13.PhotometricandkinematicﬁtsforNGC104andNGC5139.Thecurvesrepresentthesurfacebrightnessproﬁle(leftpanels)andthevelocitydispersionproﬁle(rightpanels)calculatedbymeansoftwo-componentmodelsintwoways:bytakingtheheaviercomponentasmadeofonlydarkremnantsorbyincludingintheheaviercomponentthepresenceofRedGiants.Watkins,L.L.,vanderMarel,R.P.,Bellini,A.,&Anderson,J.2015,ApJ,803,29Zocchi,A.,Bertin,G.,&Varri,A.L.2012,A&A,539,A65,(ZBV12)AppendixA:Darkremnants,RedGiants,andmain-sequencestarsInthepresentstudy,wehavesimpliﬁedthediscussionofthestructureofasystemmadeofstarsofdi↵erentmassesbygroup-ingthevariousstarsintotwocomponents,lightstarsofmassm1(andtotalassociatedmassM1)andheavystarsofmassm2(andtotalassociatedmassM2).Realglobularclustersareextremelycomplex,becausetheycontainnotonlystarswithbasicallyacontinuousspectrumofmasses,butalsoobjects,suchasbinarystars,thatfalloutsidetheparadigmoftheequationstradition-allyusedinstellardynamics.Themaingoalofthisappendixistodetermine“reasonable"estimatesforthemassratiosm2/m1andM2/M1tobeusedinouridealizedmodels,asintroducedinSect.3.Mostoftheobjectsthatarenaturallyassignedtotheheav-iercomponent(andcollectivelyshouldmakemostofthemassM2)areoftencalled“darkremnants".Infact,whitedwarfs,neu-tronstars,andblackholesarenotexpectedtocontributemuchtothesurfacebrightnessproﬁleofthecluster.Inturn,mostofthemassM1isexpectedtobemadeoflow-mass(typicallybe-low0.5M )main-sequencestars.Thereremainsathirdclassofstars,theRedGiantstars,whichareexpectedtobelongtotheheaviercomponent(becausetheirmassisthoughttobeintherange0.7 0.8M ,verysimilartotheaveragemassoftheremnants;seebelow),withonlyminorcontributiontoM2;yet,theyareexpectedtocontributesigniﬁcantlytotheobservedsur-facebrightnessand,importantly,aregenerallyusedaskinematictracers,inthesensethattheyarethemainsourceofthekine-maticdatapointscollectedbyspectroscopicobservations.Themodelingofglobularclustersaddressedinthispaperisthussig-niﬁcantlydi↵erentfromthatusedinthetwo-componentdescrip-tionofellipticalgalaxies,forwhichonecomponentrepresentstheluminouscollisionlessstellarsystemandtheothercompo-nentthedarkmatterhalo;still,anelementofanalogyexists,be-causeinbothcasesthestructuralproﬁlesofself-consistenttwo-componentmodelsaregenerallydi↵erentfromthoseofone-componentmodels.Articlenumber,page13of14A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA_2016_28274

Appendix A: Dark remnants, Red Giants, and

main-sequence stars

In the present study, we have simpliﬁed the discussion of the
structure of a system made of stars of diﬀerent masses by group-
ing the various stars into two components, light stars of mass m1
(and total associated mass M1) and heavy stars of mass m2 (and
total associated mass M2). Real globular clusters are extremely
complex, because they contain not only stars with basically a
continuous spectrum of masses, but also objects, such as binary
stars, that fall outside the paradigm of the equations tradition-
ally used in stellar dynamics. The main goal of this appendix is
to determine “reasonable" estimates for the mass ratios m2/m1
and M2/M1 to be used in our idealized models, as introduced in
Sect. 3.

Most of the objects that are naturally assigned to the heav-
ier component (and collectively should make most of the mass
M2) are often called “dark remnants". In fact, white dwarfs, neu-
tron stars, and black holes are not expected to contribute much
to the surface brightness proﬁle of the cluster. In turn, most of

Article number, page 14 of 15

the mass M1 is expected to be made of low-mass (typically be-
low 0.5 M(cid:12)) main-sequence stars. There remains a third class
of stars, the Red Giant stars, which are expected to belong to
the heavier component (because their mass is thought to be in
the range 0.7 − 0.8 M(cid:12), very similar to the average mass of the
remnants; see below), with only minor contribution to M2; yet,
they are expected to contribute signiﬁcantly to the observed sur-
face brightness and, importantly, are generally used as kinematic
tracers, in the sense that they are the main source of the kine-
matic data points collected by spectroscopic observations. The
modeling of globular clusters addressed in this paper is thus sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀerent from that used in the two-component descrip-
tion of elliptical galaxies, for which one component represents
the luminous collisionless stellar system and the other compo-
nent the dark matter halo; still, an element of analogy exists, be-
cause in both cases the structural proﬁles of self-consistent two-
component models are generally diﬀerent from those of one-
component models.

To estimate a priori some quantities that deﬁne our idealized
model, we start from the Initial Mass Function (IMF), which de-
ﬁnes the initial distribution of stars with mass. Then we make
some very simple assumptions about star evolution to estimate
how stars have evolved from their initial condition and thus infer
some properties of the present distribution of masses. We refer
to three diﬀerent IMFs. The ﬁrst has been proposed by Salpeter
(1955) and is a single power law
ξ(m) = Dm−2.35,
(A.1)
where D is a constant. Thus, the quantity ξ(m)dm is the initial
number of stars with mass in the range (m, m + dm). The total
mass of stars within the mass range (mmin,mmax) is given by a
simple integration:

mξ(m)dm.

The corresponding number of stars is

so that a mean value for the single mass is given by m = M/N.
The other forms of IMF considered are taken from Miller &
Scalo (1979) and Kroupa (2001).

More massive stars evolve more rapidly, leaving the main
sequence and becoming remnants after a relatively rapid transi-
tion in the giant branch. For our purposes, we assume that the
main-sequence stars with masses larger than ≈ 0.8 M(cid:12) become
remnants instantly (i.e., in a time very short compared to the age
of the cluster). In particular, stars with masses from 0.8 to 10 M(cid:12)
become white dwarfs, those with masses from 10 to 25 M(cid:12) be-
come neutron stars, and those from 25 to 100 M(cid:12) end up as
black holes (we adopted the same mass ranges used by Gill et al.
2008). A certain fraction of the initial mass is lost through su-
pernova explosions or gas expelled by planetary nebulae. Thus,
for white dwarfs we consider masses in the range 0.5 − 1.4 M(cid:12);
for neutron stars we take masses in the range 1.3− 2 M(cid:12), and for
the black holes masses in the range 5 − 10 M(cid:12). Fast evolution
is thus assumed to map an initial range of masses 0.8 − 100 M(cid:12)
distributed according to the IMF into a present-day mass range
0.5−10 M(cid:12) for the remnants. The mass functions of the remnants
are thus constructed from the IMF by taking the same slope in
the corresponding mass ranges. The number of remnants must be
equal to the initial number of the main-sequence stars. Such con-
dition ﬁxes the constant D of the mass function of the remnants.

mmin

M =(cid:90) mmax
N =(cid:90) mmax

ξ(m)dm,

mmin

(A.2)

(A.3)

Ruggero de Vita et al.: A class of spherical, truncated, anisotropic models for application to globular clusters

Table A.1. Masses of diﬀerent stellar components.

mMS
mWD
mNS
mBH
mDR
mMS /mDR
MMS /MDR

Salpeter Kroupa Miller-Scalo
0.21 M(cid:12)
0.78 M(cid:12)
1.59 M(cid:12)
6.80 M(cid:12)
0.85 M(cid:12)
0.24
3.88

0.29 M(cid:12)
0.77 M(cid:12)
1.57 M(cid:12)
6.59 M(cid:12)
0.79 M(cid:12)
0.37
1.47

0.28 M(cid:12)
0.79 M(cid:12)
1.59 M(cid:12)
6.59 M(cid:12)
0.81 M(cid:12)
0.35
2.10

Notes. Mean values for the masses of the typical main sequence star
(MS), white dwarf (WD), neutron star (NS) and black hole (BH). By
dark remnant (DR) we mean all the possible remnants in the cluster.
The last row represents the ratio of the total masses.

Once the various mass functions have been properly deﬁned, we
proceed to calculate the mean mass and the total mass of each
group of objects. The results are summarized in Table A.1.

By identifying the light stars of component 1 with the main-
sequence stars and the heavy stars of component 2 with the rem-
nants, in our models we take,4 for simplicity, m1 = 0.25 M(cid:12),
m2 = 0.75 M(cid:12), m2/m1 = 3 and M2/M1 = 1/3.
Therefore, the idealized evolution model considered in this
Appendix does not include the presence of RGs in the ﬁnal state.
A posteriori the presence of RGs may be taken into account by
considering the mass-to-light ratio of the heavy component in
the idealized two-component models as a parameter depending
on the number of RGs present in the cluster. By determining
the mass-to-light ratio of the heavy component, a ﬁt to the data
could thus give an estimate of the number of giants in the cluster.
Alternatively, if an estimate of the number of RGs is available
independently, we would have an a priori estimate of the mass-
to-light ratio for the heavy component and thus test the adequacy
of the two-component models under such a constraint.

4 Note that this choice violates the Spitzer criterion (see Spitzer 1969).

Article number, page 15 of 15

