6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
7
9
9
5
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Retrieval of Precise Radial Velocities from Near-Infrared High Resolution

Spectra of Low Mass Stars

Peter Gao1, Plavchan P.2, Gagn´e J.3,4, Furlan E.5, Bottom M.6, Anglada-Escud´e G.7,8, White
R.9, Davison C. L.9, Beichman C.5, Brinkworth C.5,10, Johnson J.11, Ciardi D.5, Wallace K.12,
Mennesson B.12, von Braun K.13, Vasisht G.12, Prato L.13, Kane S. R.14, Tanner A.15, Crawford

T. J.12, Latham D.11, Rougeot R.16, Geneser C. S.2, Catanzarite J.17

ABSTRACT

Given that low-mass stars have intrinsically low luminosities at optical wavelengths
and a propensity for stellar activity, it is advantageous for radial velocity (RV) surveys
of these objects to use near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths. In this work we describe and
test a novel RV extraction pipeline dedicated to retrieving RVs from low mass stars
using NIR spectra taken by the CSHELL spectrograph at the NASA Infrared Telescope
Facility, where a methane isotopologue gas cell is used for wavelength calibration. The

1Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, MC 150-21, 1200 East California

Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA; pgao@caltech.edu

2Department of Physics, Missouri State University, 901 S National Ave, Springﬁeld, MO 65897, USA

3Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, DC 20015, USA

4Sagan Fellow

5NASA Exoplanet Science Institute, California Institute of Technology, 770 S. Wilson Ave., Pasadena, CA 91125,

USA

6Division of Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

7School of Physics and Astronomy, Queen Mary University of London, 327 Mile End Rd, E1 4NS, London, UK

8Centre for Astrophysics Research, University of Hertfordshire, College Lane, AL10 9AB, Hatﬁeld, UK

9Department of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA

10National Center for Atmospheric Research, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, CO 80307

11Institute for Theory and Computation, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cam-

bridge, Massachusetts 02138 USA

12Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

13Lowell Observatory, West Mars Hill Road, Flagstaﬀ, AZ 86001, USA

14Department of Physics & Astronomy, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Avenue, San Francisco, CA

94132, USA

15Mississippi State University, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Hilbun Hall, Starkville, MS 39762, USA

16(ESA, European Space Research and Technology Centre)

17NASA Ames Research Center, MS 245-3, P.O. Box 1, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035-0001, USA

– 2 –

pipeline minimizes the residuals between the observations and a spectral model com-
posed of templates for the target star, the gas cell, and atmospheric telluric absorption;
models of the line spread function, continuum curvature, and sinusoidal fringing; and a
parameterization of the wavelength solution. The stellar template is derived iteratively
from the science observations themselves without a need for separate observations ded-
icated to retrieving it. Despite limitations from CSHELL’s narrow wavelength range
and instrumental systematics, we are able to (1) obtain an RV precision of 35 m s−1 for
the RV standard star GJ 15 A over a time baseline of 817 days, reaching the photon
noise limit for our attained SNR, (2) achieve ∼ 3 m s−1 RV precision for the M giant
SV Peg over a baseline of several days and conﬁrm its long-term RV trend due to stellar
pulsations, as well as obtain nightly noise ﬂoors of ∼2–6 m s−1, and (3) show that our
data are consistent with the known masses, periods, and orbital eccentricities of the
two most massive planets orbiting GJ 876. Future applications of our pipeline to RV
surveys using the next generation of NIR spectrographs, such as iSHELL, will enable
the potential detection of Super-Earths and Mini-Neptunes in the habitable zones of M
dwarfs.

Subject headings: techniques: radial velocities, planets and satellites: detection

1.

Introduction

The radial velocity (RV) technique has been extremely successful in the detection and conﬁr-
mation of exoplanets (Latham et al. 1989; Mayor & Queloz 1995). In keeping with our pursuit of
Earth-like worlds, the majority of RV targets have been FGK stars similar to our Sun (Akeson et al.
2013). However, this neglects M dwarfs, which make up 75% of the stars in the Solar neighborhood
(Henry et al. 2006). M dwarfs’ habitable zones (HZs) are also at smaller semi-major axes due to
their lower luminosities; coupled with their lower masses, this results in larger radial velocity per-
turbations from a companion planet in the HZ than for FGK stars. Surveys of close-by early- and
mid-M dwarfs have reached RV precisions down to ∼ 2 m s−1, suﬃcient to detect Super-Earths in
these stars’ HZs (Zechmeister et al. 2009; Bonﬁls et al. 2013); by comparison, a twenty-fold increase
in RV precision is needed to ﬁnd Earth-mass planets in the HZs of Sun-like stars.

The detection of planets around M dwarfs is hampered by two important factors, however.
First, K and M stars are generally more active than G stars, with late-M dwarfs being the most
active (West et al. 2004; Basri et al. 2010). Stellar activity, such as starspots, can produce false
positive planet signatures by introducing additional power at the frequency of the rotational period
of the star and aliases thereof in the Doppler measurements (Robertson et al. 2015; Vanderburg
et al. 2015). Second, the low luminosity of M dwarfs at optical wavelengths makes it diﬃcult to
obtain high signal to noise (SNR) measurements. A logical solution to these problems is to observe
at near infrared (NIR) wavelengths. Not only do M dwarfs emit most of their light in the NIR, the

– 3 –

temperature contrast between starspots and the rest of the chromosphere is also reduced, decreasing
the periodic modulation of chromospheric activity on the Doppler measurements (Mart´ın et al. 2006;
Reiners et al. 2010; Mahmud et al. 2011; Crockett et al. 2012; Anglada-Escud´e et al. 2013). This
eﬀect can help lower the rate of false positive optical planet detections by discriminating actual
planets from the eﬀects of spots (Hu´elamo al. 2008; Prato et al. 2008). This also allows for NIR
RV surveys to focus on younger stars, which tend to be more active.

Several NIR RV surveys of M dwarfs have been conducted recently. Rodler et al. (2012) used
the NIRSPEC spectrograph at the Keck II Telescope to observe eight late-M dwarfs in the J band
(∼ 1.1–1.4 µm) and obtained an RV precision of 180–300 m s−1. Meanwhile, Bailey et al. (2012)
and Blake et al. (2010) used NIRSPEC in the K band (∼ 2.0–2.4 µm) to obtain an RV precision
of 50 m s−1 for mid- and late-M dwarfs. Tanner et al. (2012) also used NIRSPEC in the K band
to observe a sample of late-M dwarfs, with a resulting RV precision of 45 m s−1. By comparison,
simulations have shown that an RV precision of 25–30 m s−1 for M dwarfs with Tef f < 2200 K
are possible in the NIR with spectrograph resolutions R ∼ 25000, similar to that of NIRSPEC in
the J and K bands (McLean et al. 1998), though instrumental eﬀects and systematic errors are
not taken into account in this estimate (Rodler et al. 2011). For earlier M dwarfs (Tef f ∼ 3500
K) and a higher resolution spectrograph (R > 60000), ∼ 10 m s−1 may be possible in the H and
K bands (Reiners et al. 2010; Bottom et al. 2013). Even so, these results are more than an order
of magnitude larger than the ∼ 1 m s−1 RV precision limit of current optical RV surveys (e.g.,
Dumusque et al. 2012).

The lower RV precision of NIR RV surveys is partly attributable to the lack of a wavelength
calibration method on par with those of optical surveys. Precise wavelength calibration is currently
obtained either through extreme environmental stabilization (e.g. HARPS), or the use of a simul-
taneous common optical path wavelength reference. The latter process involves the comparison
of the observations with a set of “standard” well-calibrated spectra. In the previously mentioned
NIR RV studies, telluric lines were used for calibration, which were imprinted on the incoming star
light from its passage through the Earth’s atmosphere; comparisons between the observed telluric
lines with models or observations of telluric spectra then provide a wavelength solution. In optical
surveys, precise wavelength calibration is realized by placing an Iodine gas cell in the telescope
optical path (Marcy & Butler 1992; Butler et al. 1996). As the incoming star light passes through
the gas cell, it picks up the spectral signatures of its gas. Comparing these observed spectra with
a precisely measured absorption spectrum of the gas cell at higher spectral resolution than the
astronomical spectrograph (R ∼ 500,000 obtained with a Fourier Transform Spectrometer) then
yields a wavelength solution. Placing the gas cell in the optical path of the telescope also ensures
that the spectral lines are obtained simultaneously and under the same physical conditions (i.e.
temperature, pressure, humidity) as the instrument and the telescope, which is not the case for
telluric lines. Similar gas cells have recently been developed for the NIR, such as the ammonia
gas cell used by Bean et al. (2010) on the CRIRES spectrograph at the VLT to obtain an RV
precision of ∼ 5 m s−1 for late-M dwarfs. Gas cells ﬁlled with hydrocarbons, chlorocarbons, HCl,

– 4 –

and isotopologues of HCN, C2H2, CO, and CH4 have also been considered (Mahadevan & Ge 2009;
Valdivielso et al. 2010; Anglada-Escud´e et al. 2012; Plavchan et al. 2013a).

An additional issue with current NIR RV surveys is that they rely on large (8-10 m aperture)
telescopes, which generally have fewer nights available for RV monitoring.
In contrast, smaller
telescopes can provide the high cadence necessary for precise RV observations. For example, Prato
et al. (2008); Crockett et al. (2011, 2012); Davison et al. (2015) were able to use the smaller (3 m
aperture) NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF), in conjunction with telluric line and emission
lamp wavelength calibration, to obtain RV precision of 60–130 m s−1 for M dwarfs in the K band
using the CSHELL spectrograph, which has a spectral resolution R ∼ 46000 (Greene et al. 1993). In
addition, many of the instruments currently in development for dedicated NIR RV surveys will be
installed on smaller aperture telescopes, e.g. CARMENES/Calar Alto Astronomical Observatory
(Quirrenbach et al. 2010), SPIRou/Canada France Hawaii Telescope (Santerne et al. 2013), and
iSHELL/NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (Rayner et al. 2012). The two former instruments will
rely on extreme stabilization, whereas the latter will use gas cells for stable wavelength calibration.
It is essential that we prepare for these next generation NIR RV surveys by focusing on data
reduction and analysis methods that can process their results.

In this paper, we describe in detail the NIR RV extraction pipeline used in our RV survey
of M dwarfs conducted using the NASA IRTF CSHELL spectrograph (Greene et al. 1993), and
presented in Anglada-Escud´e et al. (2012); Plavchan et al. (2013a); Gagn´e et al. (submitted to ApJ).
This pipeline uses the “Grand Solution” approach, which derives the stellar template, wavelength
solution, and RVs simultaneously (Valenti & Anderson 2010) in an iterative fashion. This diﬀers
from other methods used in some previous RV surveys, such as substituting imperfect stellar spectral
models as stellar templates. Thus, our pipeline oﬀers a novel way to extract RVs from raw spectra
from past, present, and future observation campaigns in the NIR. We test our pipeline on the RV
standard GJ 15 A to assess the RV precision obtainable for early-M dwarfs, as well as the M Giant
SV Peg to evaluate the pipeline’s precision at the high SNR limit. We also test it on the planet
host GJ 876 to validate its planet detection capabilities.

We outline our observations of GJ 15 A, SV Peg, and GJ 876 in §2 and describe our data
reduction process in §3. In §4 we detail our RV extraction pipeline and in §5 we present our results.
We summarize our work and discuss future prospects in §6.

2. Observations

Three targets were picked from our NIR RV survey to test the RV stability, high SNR behavior,
and planet detection capabilities, of the RV pipeline presented here. These targets are summarized
in Table 1. GJ 15 A was chosen as a RV standard star due to its brightness, as well as its established
RV scatter of a few m s−1 due mostly to an orbiting exoplanet (Endl et al. 2006; Howard et al.
2014), which is below our estimated level of precision (Anglada-Escud´e et al. 2012). SV Peg is an M

– 5 –

giant star that has already been used as a reliable high SNR target in Anglada-Escud´e et al. (2012),
and therefore will be used for our high SNR tests as well. GJ 876 has four conﬁrmed planets, with
the most massive two causing RV amplitudes ∼ 200 m s−1, which should be easily detectable with
our pipeline (Delfosse et al. 1998; Marcy et al. 1998, 2001; Rivera et al. 2005, 2010).

Data were taken on the 3 m telescope at NASA IRTF from September 2010 to August 2012
for GJ 15 A and GJ 876, and to August 2011 for SV Peg1. Table 2 gives the minimum, maximum,
median, and total SNR per pixel of the observations of each night, as well as the number of
observations (Nobs) obtained that night for the three targets. Single order spectra in the K band
(2.309–2.315 µm) were obtained using the CSHELL spectrograph with a 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)5 slit and a spectral
resolution R ∼ 46000. A circular variable ﬁlter (CVF) was used for order selection. A methane
isotopologue (13CH4) gas cell with 90% continuum throughput was placed into the beam to achieve
wavelength calibration (Anglada-Escud´e et al. 2012; Plavchan et al. 2013a). To set the wavelength
scale at the start of observations, we observed A-type stars with the gas cell in the optical path of
the telescope and matched the deepest gas cell line to pixel column 179 on the CSHELL detector.
For the brightest A stars a latent image of the target was sometimes left on the detector after
switching from imaging mode (used to position the target in the slit) to spectroscopic mode; these
spectra were ﬂagged during the data reduction process and discarded. Around 15 ﬂat ﬁelds and
darks were taken in spectroscopic mode at the end of each night of observations, each with an
exposure time of 20 s. Nodding along the slit was used during the September 2010 run, but only
the “A” nod position was used here, as systematic errors were introduced into the RVs upon usage
of diﬀerent trace positions. Subsequent runs did not use nodding, as it was deemed unnecessary
and detrimental to RV precision. Typical integration times were tuned to avoid nonlinear detector
regimes (>2000 ADU per exposure) and to account for seeing variations, ranging from 60–200 s
and 180–240 s for GJ 15 A and GJ 876, respectively, allowing for SNR per pixel ∼ 30 for each raw
spectrum and ∼ 200 after ∼ 2 hours of combined integration. Seeing usually varied between 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)5
and 1.(cid:48)(cid:48)5. Exposure times of 5 s were suﬃcient to obtain SNR per pixel ∼ 100 for each spectrum
of SV Peg under most seeing conditions. By comparison, the limiting magnitude of CSHELL in
the K band (∼ 2.2 µm) for SNR per resolution element of 10, resolving power of 21500 (1.(cid:48)(cid:48)slit), a
total observing time of 1 hour, and a single exposure integration time of 120 s is 12.8 (Greene et
al. 1993). Converting from this standard to our case is diﬃcult without a PSF model, which varies
considerably for our observations.

The time baseline of the observations analyzed in this work for GJ 15 A and GJ 876 are 817
and 707 days, respectively. For SV Peg, which is variable on a time scale ∼ 145 days with RV
amplitude ∼ 1.5 km s−1(Hinkle et al. 1997; Lebzelter & Hinkle 2002; Winnberg et al. 2008), we
focus on intra-night and intra-run RV stability only.

1No public archive currently exists for NASA IRTF data, but spectra used in this study can be made available

upon request to the authors.

– 6 –

3. Data Reduction

All spectra were extracted consistently with a custom interactive data language (IDL) pipeline.
We found that our ability to achieve RV measurements at precisions < 55 m s−1 strongly relies on
(1) a careful construction of the ﬂat ﬁelds, (2) eﬃcient detection and correction of bad pixels to
prevent them from contaminating the extracted spectra, and (3) a correction of the instrumental
fringing in the individual ﬂat ﬁelds, which occurred at a ∼ 0.2–0.6% level and are caused by
the CSHELL CVF. Instrumental fringing also aﬀects individual science images; however, it is not
possible to eﬃciently correct them directly due to low illumination of most of the detector. For
this reason, residual fringing was taken into account in our spectral model when radial velocities
are extracted from the reduced spectra (see §4).

Combined spectroscopic ﬂat ﬁeld images were created for every night by median-combining
typically 15 individual ﬂats with exposure times of 20 seconds, from which a dark frame was
subtracted. Removal of the instrumental fringing pattern in the ﬂat ﬁelds is shown in Figure
1. Fringing subtraction was done by ﬁrst creating a fringing-free ﬂat ﬁeld (panel A) by average-
combining a large number of per-night ﬂat ﬁelds; fringing gets averaged out since its phase and
amplitude vary randomly across observing nights, leaving behind only the permanent detector
response. This fringing-free ﬂat ﬁeld was subsequently divided from each combined ﬂat ﬁeld (one per
night) to make 2D fringing patterns apparent (panel B). We median-combined individual columns
of this image to obtain a 1D fringing pattern. A Levenberg-Marquardt least-squares algorithm was
then used to ﬁt the 1D fringing pattern with a shifted and renormalized interference function of
the form

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:20) 1

n

I1(Po) =

Af
n

1

1 + F sin2 (ωpPo + φ)

− 1

+ Af + I0 + sPo, where n =

1
2

1 − 1

1 − F

(1)

is a normalization factor, Af is the amplitude of the interference pattern, F is the ﬁnesse parameter,
Po is the pixel grid on the detector, ωp is the spatial frequency (in units of pixel−1), φ is the phase,
and I0 and s allow for a linear slope in the ﬂux. The resulting parameters are then used as starting
estimates to ﬁt the full 2D fringing pattern using the following model :

I2(Po, y) =

1

1 + F sin2 (ωpPo + φ + φyy)

− 1

+ 1

(Af + Af,yy) + I0 + spPo + syy + sp,yPoy
(2)

where y is the column number on the detector, perpendicular to Po, φy allows for a linear phase
shift with respect to rows (resulting in tilted interference fringes), Af,y allows for the amplitude
to vary with rows and I0, sp, sy and sp,y allow for a 2D plane to be ﬁt to the residual ﬂux. The
resulting 2D fringing pattern (panel C), from which the linear plane ﬁt was subtracted, I2(Po, y) +
1− (spPo + syy + sp,yPoy) was ﬁnally divided from the combined ﬂat ﬁeld to obtain a corrected ﬂat

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

– 7 –

ﬁeld to be used in the data reduction process (panel D, multiplied by the fringing-free ﬂat ﬁeld).
Though the fringing is not fully removed at the top and bottom edges of the image, the target
spectral trace is always located at the center of the image, and so our technique is suﬃcient.

Individual science images were read separately and divided by the corrected ﬂat ﬁeld of the
corresponding observing night. We cross-correlated a median spatial proﬁle of the spectrum at each
spectral position to determine a linear solution to the trace tilt and corrected it by interpolating
in the spatial direction only. This step was repeated three times iteratively.

m + 1)γ where Am is the amplitude, P (cid:48)

We re-constructed a median spatial proﬁle of the straightened trace and ﬁtted a Moﬀat proﬁle,
deﬁned by Am/((Po − P (cid:48)
o the central pixel position, σm
the characteristic width, and γ an index that controls the size of the wings (Moﬀat 1969). We used
the resulting ﬁtting parameters to set all pixels to zero at positions |Po−P (cid:48)
2γ + 2.3 in the
median spatial proﬁle. The median spatial proﬁle was then used in combination with a standard
optimal extraction procedure (Horne 1986; Massey & Hanson 2013) to extract the spectrum a ﬁrst
time.

o)2/σ2

√
o| > σm/

The resulting spectrum and spatial proﬁle were then used to reconstruct a smooth synthetic 2D
spectrum. We subtracted this synthetic spectrum from the raw science image, and created a map
of small scale structures in the spatial direction by taking the minimum value between the absolute
values of the upwards and downwards vertical (i.e., spatial direction) derivatives in the resulting
diﬀerence image. We normalized each column of this map so that they have a unit median, and
ﬂagged all pixels with a resulting ﬂux value larger than 5 as bad pixels. The optimal extraction
was then repeated while forcing the masking of these previously identiﬁed bad pixels.

The extracted spectra were normalized to a unit continuum and no wavelength calibration was
performed at this step. The instrumental blaze function was also not corrected in this step, and is
instead treated as a free parameter in our modeling of the science spectra when RVs are computed
(see §4). This allows a better determination of the blaze function, especially in the presence of
several deep absorption features from the gas cell.

A ﬁnal bad pixel detection ﬁlter was applied in the extracted 1D spectrum by identifying up
to 5 pixels with ﬂux values signiﬁcantly larger than the continuum. We chose this value of 5 pixels
as it is the maximal number of bad pixels that we observed in an extracted 1D spectrum. We then
counted the number of pixels with ﬂux values fi > t where t is a threshold value that goes from
1 to 1.5. If any range at least as large as ∆t = 0.05 could be identiﬁed over which the number
of ﬂagged pixels did not change and was lower than 5, then these pixels were ﬂagged as bad and
ignored in the RV extraction pipeline. Figure 2 shows typical reduced spectra for each of the three
targets.

– 8 –

4. Radial Velocity Pipeline

The RV extraction pipeline is written in Matlab with a few bookkeeping scripts written in
IDL used for determining barycentric corrections (barycentric vel.pro, Wright & Eastman (2014)).
The RVs are retrieved by minimizing the diﬀerence between a model spectrum and the observed
spectrum using the SIMPS Nelder-Mead amoeba simplex algorithm (Bajzer & Penzar 1999). Figure
3 shows a schematic of the RV pipeline and includes all the free parameters that deﬁne the model
spectrum. We elaborate on these parameters and the calculation of the RVs in the following
sections2.

4.1. Spectral Model

We base the model Iobs(λ) on that of Butler et al. (1996), where λ is the wavelength solution
of the model. However, additional components are necessary for our NIR observations, such that

Iobs(λ) = LSF (λ) ∗ [Is(λ + ∆λs)Tg(λ + ∆λg)Tt(λ + ∆λt)Σ(λ)K(λ)],

(3)
where Is is the stellar spectrum, which is derived iteratively (see §4.3); LSF is the line spread
function/instrumental proﬁle (P SF in Eq. 1 of Butler et al. (1996)); Σ is a sinusoidal function
that compensates for the interference fringing left in Iobs by the CVF ﬁlter; K is a quadratic blaze
function that normalizes any curvature in the continuum, with the amplitude of each order (b0,
b1, b2) as free parameters; ∆λs and ∆λt are the Doppler shifts of the stellar and the telluric lines,
respectively, and both are treated as free parameters; Tt is the atmospheric telluric transmission
function, with the line depths controlled by an exponent τt

Tt = T τt
to ,

(4)

where Tto is the NOAO telluric absorption spectrum given by Livingston & Wallace (1991); and
Tg is the methane isotopologue gas cell transmission function with its line depths controlled in an
identical manner:

Tg = T τg
go

(5)

where Tgo was measured at high resolution using a Fourier Transform Spectrometer (FTS; Plavchan
et al. 2013a). τg is ﬁxed at 0.97 under the assumption that the gas cell is stable over the observational

2The RV pipeline described herein is currently private, but can be made available upon request to the authors.
A future iteration of the pipeline dedicated to analyzing iSHELL data is planned to be made public once the code is
suﬃciently validated and documented.

– 9 –

period, with the speciﬁc value of 0.97 set through optimization tests. The fact that the ﬁxed value
is not 1.0 is likely due to the oﬀ-axis angle at which the cell was placed in the FTS, as opposed to
in CSHELL, and the resulting slightly diﬀerent light path lengths through the cell. τt is allowed to
vary as a proxy for the airmass, though this is only valid in our case since most of the telluric lines
in our wavelength range are from methane absorption; if water vapor absorption were also present,
then their lines would behave diﬀerently, and a single τt would no longer suﬃce.

The upper panel of Figure 4 shows Tgo (bottom) and Tto (top) in the wavelength range of the
observations. This range was chosen to minimize the number of contaminating telluric and OH
emission lines while maximizing the number of gas cell lines used for wavelength calibration and
the number of stellar CO lines to increase the RV information content of the target spectra. Tgo
and Tto have 12 and 5 times higher resolution than that of our observations, respectively.

Even though Tgo is assumed to be much more accurately measured than Tto and Is, we found
features in the residuals of our ﬁts of our spectral model to the observations that appeared to
correspond to gas cell lines. To identify these features, we observed A type stars with the gas cell
and ﬁt to the data our spectral model using a ﬂat line for Is; the residuals were than averaged
to reveal any coherent features, the majority of which should correspond to diﬀerences between
the gas cell spectrum as observed at NASA IRTF and its laboratory-measured template, since
the stellar spectrum has no features and there are only a few telluric lines. This process can be
iterated multiple times by adding the averaged residuals to the gas cell and then repeating the ﬁt
and residual averaging. We expand on this process in §4.3, where we use it to derive the stellar
template. The lower panel of Figure 4 shows the diﬀerence between the original Tgo and the ﬁnal
Tgo after multiple iterations. The lack of diﬀerence at the edges is due to the wavelength extent of
the observations. There appears to be some correlation between the high frequency oscillations of
the diﬀerence and the gas cell lines. The standard deviation of the diﬀerence is ∼ 1%, and may be
attributable to the diﬀerences in the environmental properties between where the gas cell template
was measured and where it is being used for observations of our M dwarf targets, though the gas
cell temperature is kept steady to within 0.1 K when used for observations (Plavchan et al. 2013a).
Other possibilities include the existence of low amplitude, coherent noise in the detector that was
not accounted for during the data reduction process, as well as subtle interpolation errors in the
RV pipeline. Regardless of the cause, using the new Tgo reduces our RV scatter compared to using
the original Tgo.

Tg is used to set the deviation of the gas cell spectrum, ∆λg, from the “true” wavelength
solution.
In other words, we assume that the gas cell wavelength solution is correct, and any
deviations of the gas cell lines in the observations from this true correct wavelength solution is due
to a shift in the wavelength solution of the observations. We can then deﬁne a relative wavelength
shift ∆λ = ∆λs − ∆λg that is directly related to the barycenter-corrected RV of the star with

RV =

c∆λ
λc

+ vb,

(6)

– 10 –

where c is the speed of light, λc is the central wavelength of the spectral window, and vb is the
barycenter velocity calculated using the IDL program barycentric vel.pro (Wright & Eastman 2014).
We perform the stellar wavelength shift in logarithmic space to be consistent with the Doppler
equation, as ∆ln λ ∼ ∆λ/λc.

The LSF is constructed using Hermite functions ψi(x) (i.e., Arfken et al. 2012), which are

derived iteratively using the following recursive relation and zeroth and ﬁrst degree terms:

(cid:114) 2

i

ψi(x) =

[xψi−1(x) −

(cid:114) i − 1

2

ψi−2(x)],

(7)

(8)

(9)

ψ0(x) = π− 1

4 e− 1

2 x2

,

√

2xψ0(x).

ψ1(x) =

m(cid:88)

where x = Pf /ω, Pf is the pixel grid of the model, and ω is the standard deviation (width) of the
Gaussian factor, which is a free parameter in the model. We compute the LSF by summing the
ﬁrst m terms

LSF (x) = ψ0(x) +

aiψi(x)

(10)

i=1

where ai is the amplitude of the ith term relative to the 0th term and are also free parameters.
Our nominal model uses m = 4, which we show to be suﬃcient in §5.1.4. The LSF is normalized
to a unit area under curve, and the simplex minimization is constrained such that no part of the
LSF becomes negative. We experimented with multi-Gaussian and multi-Lorentzian LSFs, as in
previous works (e.g., Valenti et al. 1995; Butler et al. 1996; Johnson et al. 2006; Bean et al. 2007,
2010), but they yielded lower RV precision than our current Hermite function implementation,
likely as a result of the relatively low SNR of our observations. The convolution is done on the
pixel grid rather than the wavelength grid, though they are equivalent.

As described in §3, sinusoidal interference patterns of variable amplitude and phase are present
in both the ﬂat ﬁelds and the science data due to the CSHELL CVF ﬁlter. These fringes become
obvious in the spectrum of an A star taken without the methane isotopologue gas cell, as shown
for 32 Peg in Figure 5. Fringes of a similar amplitude were also seen in the spectra taken by Brown
et al. (2002) using NIRSPEC, and were corrected by parametrization of the sinusoid and linear
regression. Meanwhile, Blake et al. (2010) also observed fringes while using NIRSPEC, which they
corrected by applying a model sinusoid of ﬁxed amplitude, period, and phase. We use a similar
method and parametrize the fringing as a sinusoid function Σ(λ):

– 11 –

(cid:18) 2πλ

B

(cid:19)

+ C

,

Σ = 1 + A sin

(11)

where the parameters A, B, and C are free to vary.

The spectral model is compared to the data on a common wavelength grid. As with Crockett
et al. (2011), we ﬁnd that the wavelength solution of the data is variable between observations,
and that the variability is quadratic in wavelength. We also ﬁnd that it is dependent on the trace
position y of the observed spectrum on the detector. Thus, we deﬁne the wavelength solution of
the observations, λo, with respect to λ by

λo = λ + α(cid:48)(cid:18) Po − P c

o

(cid:19)

Npix

+ β(cid:48)(cid:18) Po − P c

o

(cid:19)2

Npix

where α(cid:48) is a linear function of y and β(cid:48) is constant in y

α(cid:48) = −0.58 + 0.0051y + α

β(cid:48) = −0.4 + β

,

(12)

(13)

(14)

α and β are free parameters, Po is again the pixel grid on the detector, P c
o is the central pixel of
said pixel grid, and Npix = 256 is the total number of pixels in the data. The coeﬃcients of Eqs.
13 and 14 are derived from ﬁtting a linear trend to the relationship between y and a set of α(cid:48) and
β(cid:48) values obtained from ﬁts to several high SNR observations of GJ 537 A (Gagn´e et al. submitted
to ApJ) where no y dependence was assumed (i.e. α(cid:48) = α, β(cid:48) = β)

The model Iobs(λ) is then interpolated onto λo. We use 4096 pixels in the model pixel grid
Pf to reach suﬃcient resolution for convolution with the LSF, and downsample to 256 pixels when
interpolating onto λd. The downsampling is done by binning every 4096/256 = 16 model “pixels”.
Any model pixel that is lying partly in two data pixel bins is split between them according to the
fraction of the model pixel that is in each of the two data pixel bins.

Table 3 lists all of the free parameters that deﬁne the nominal spectral model, which are varied
by SIMPS to optimize the ﬁt between the model and the observed spectra. The optimization is
accomplished by minimizing the average of the RMS and the robust sigma (Hoaglin et al. 1983;
Beers et al. 1990) of the residuals after application of the bad pixel mask, which sets the weight of
bad pixels to zero (see §3). Including the robust sigma in the minimization process decreases the
impact of outliers due to noise, hot pixels, and unmasked bad pixels. However, just minimizing the
robust sigma alone without the RMS produces bad ﬁts to the telluric lines due to their similarity
to outliers when there are very few of them, as in our case (Figure 4). All parameters aside from
the gas cell optical depth τg are allowed to vary, while only the relative wavelength shift ∆ln λ, the

– 12 –

gas cell wavelength shift ∆λg, and the phase of the fringing correction C are allowed to vary freely.
The other parameters are allowed to vary within bounds determined from optimization tests.

4.2. RV Calculation

Due to the low SNR per pixel (Table 2) and small wavelength range (∼ 6 nm) of our individual
spectra, the RV precision of a target is calculated from nightly averaged RV values RVi, for the
ith night, deﬁned as the weighted mean of the RVs of all the individual spectra taken during that
night, weighted by the inverse square of the RMS of residuals of each model ﬁt to those spectra,
ignoring the contributions to the RMS from bad pixels,

(cid:80)
i(cid:80)

wj
i RV j

j

wj
i

j

RVi =

 1

Npix − 1

wj

i =

Npix(cid:88)

k(cid:54)=kbp

−1

(15)

(16)

d,i(k) − I j
[I j

obs,i(k)]2

i , I j

i , wj

d,i(k), and I j

where RV j
obs,i(k) are the RV, weight, observed ﬂux of the kth pixel, and model
ﬂux of the kth pixel of the jth individual spectra on the ith night, respectively, with kbp indicating
a bad pixel. The 1σ error bar of the ith nightly averaged RV point, δRVi, is calculated as the
weighted standard deviation of the individual RVs, weighted by the same quantity as calculated
for the nightly averaged RV values (see Eq. 16), and divided by the square root of the number of
spectra Nobs taken during that night,

The RV precision of a target is then deﬁned as the standard deviation of the nightly averaged RV
values, while the reduced chi-square χ2

red is calculated using

(cid:80)

j



[wj

i (RV j

Nobs

i − RVi)]2
(cid:80)

wj
i

j



δRVi =

Nn(cid:88)

χ2

red =

1

Nn − 1

(RVi − RV )2

δRV 2
i

i

1
2

(17)

(18)

where Nn is the number of nightly averaged RV points (= number of nights of observations/epochs),
and RV is the weighted mean of all the RVi values, weighted by the inverse square of the δRVi
values.

– 13 –

Note that our method of calculating the RV precision of a target is diﬀerent from that of
Gagn´e et al. (submitted to ApJ), our companion survey paper. They deﬁne the RV precision as
the weighted standard deviation of the nightly averaged RV values, weighted by δRVi, which allows
them to better constrain planet mass sensitivity.
In contrast, the purpose of the RV precision
obtained in our work is to compare to the RV precision obtained by previous works, where it is
suﬃcient to calculate just the standard deviation of the nightly averaged RV values. The method
of Gagn´e et al. (submitted to ApJ) results in lower RV RMS overall, which is indicative of mixing
data of diﬀerent SNRs.

4.3. Stellar Template Generation

The retrieval of the original stellar spectrum, Is, for use in Eq. 3 has consistently been a diﬃcult
task. Some previous works have used synthetic stellar models that calculated stellar spectra, given
eﬀective temperatures and surface gravities (Blake et al. 2010; Crockett et al. 2011; Bailey et al.
2012; Tanner et al. 2012), but this runs the risk of introducing spectral features not present in the
science targets into the spectral ﬁtting, which lowers the RV precision. Alternatively, the stellar
spectrum can be obtained from deconvolution of high resolution stellar observations using LSFs
derived from observations of A and B stars taken with a gas cell (Butler et al. 1996; Bean et al. 2010;
Rodler et al. 2012). However, this presumes that the LSF remains stable between the observations
of the targets and those of the A and B stars, which is not true for our case due to temperature
variations, instrumental ﬂexure, and mechanical disturbances to CSHELL itself (e.g. moving the
slit into position) as it moves with the telescope at its Cassegrain mount.

We thus use the target observations themselves to derive the stellar template iteratively using
a method similar to that of Sato et al. (2002). However, our method diﬀers from theirs in that the
initial guess template is completely ﬂat in order to minimize contamination of features that may
not be present in the observed spectra, and that we use all of our target observations to derive the
template in order to maximize SNR and sample a large range in barycenter velocities. This ensures
that the stellar spectrum is decoupled from “stationary” features, such as the gas cell and telluric
lines and the sinusoidal fringing, so that they do not contaminate the stellar template.

The procedure begins with the building of a model using the ﬂat spectrum in place of Is in
Eq. 3. The ﬁt produces residuals similar in shape to the actual stellar spectrum, though they are
distorted due to the simplex algorithm minimizing the residuals; for example, the stellar CO lines
will be made more shallow, or raised above the continuum to reduce their impact on the RMS and
robust sigma. We lessen this eﬀect by repeating the ﬁrst iteration with the CO lines masked out,
allowing only the stellar continuum to contribute to the RMS and robust sigma. The CO lines are
masked by ignoring all pixels with values one standard deviation below the mean of the normalized
template ﬂux derived from the original ﬁrst iteration; two pixels on each side of each CO line are
also masked to further reduce their impact on the ﬁt.

– 14 –

The residuals are then “de-shifted” to the barycenter so that they all have the same Doppler
shift, with the assumption that the star has zero RV perturbations. This is valid even for potential
planet hosts, as RV perturbations caused by planets are much smaller than a single resolution
element. Residual values that are three standard deviations above or six standard deviations below
the mean residual value (zero), and those below −1, are set to zero so that they do not contribute
to the eventual template (i.e. they are assumed to be bad pixels). We then take the median of
these residuals, weighted by the inverse square of the average of the RMS and robust sigma of each
ﬁt, and add it to the template from the previous iteration to generate the new template that will
be used in the next iteration. Pixels that are ﬂagged by the bad pixel mask are given zero weight.
In other words, residuals from better ﬁts are more represented in the stellar template than those
from worse ﬁts. We ﬁnd that variations in the quality of ﬁt is usually due to the quality (SNR) of
the data itself, and therefore it is reasonable to rely more on the best data to generate the stellar
template.

This process is repeated until the RV precision of the target stabilizes, which usually takes ∼ 10
iterations, though we typically run the pipeline for 20 iterations to conﬁrm that RV stabilization has
been reached. We speed up this process by deconvolving the residuals from the ﬁrst iteration with
the best ﬁt LSF corresponding to each residual using the Richardson-Lucy algorithm (Richardson
1972; Lucy 1974), so as to more quickly converge to the “real shape” of the stellar spectrum.
Deconvolution is avoided in subsequent iterations, as it would signiﬁcantly amplify the noise in the
data.

5. Results and Discussion

5.1. RV Stability at Modest Signal-to-Noise: GJ 15 A

5.1.1. Radial Velocities

Figure 6 shows example ﬁts of the model spectrum to a high SNR per pixel (top) and a low
SNR per pixel (bottom) observed spectrum of GJ 15 A. Note that the high SNR spectrum is not
included in our RV calculations, as it was the only spectrum taken that night. It is clear that, at
SNR ∼ 100, our spectral model is able to reproduce the observations with high ﬁdelity, while at
low SNR there is signiﬁcant scatter and deviation between model and data, though all of the major
features have been captured by the model. As Table 2 shows, the majority of our observations have
SNR per pixel closer to ∼ 30–40, thus limiting our RV precision. We will quantify the eﬀect of the
SNR on our achievable RV stability in §5.1.3.

The iterative nature of our RV pipeline results in multiple values of RV precision for a single
target, one for each iteration, and we accept the lowest RV scatter (RMS) value among all the
iterations as the RV precision achievable by our RV pipeline for that target. Figure 7 shows the
RV scatter as a function of iteration for GJ 15 A. The ﬁrst few iterations with high RV scatter

– 15 –

result from errors in the stellar template, as it is continually augmented from one iteration to the
next. Convergence in both the stellar template and the RVs is reached beyond iteration 9, after
which the RV scatter is ∼ 40 m s−1, with occasional deviations to lower values. Figure 8 shows
the RVs from iteration 13, where we are able to achieve a RV precision of 35 m s−1 over a 817 day
long baseline. Table 4 gives the nightly RV values and associated 1σ error bars. The obtained RV
precision is consistent with the theoretical RV precision given our observational setup and a SNR
per pixel of ∼ 100, the eﬀective SNR of each of our nightly averaged RV points (see Table 2 of
Anglada-Escud´e et al. 2012). If the individual RV points are considered rather than the nightly
RVs, then the RV precision is 131 m s−1, and the SNR of the observations are those between the
minimum and maximum SNR values listed in Table 2.

Figure 9 shows the progression of the stellar template with increasing iteration. In the initial
iterations, the depth of several of the CO lines are much shallower than the central CO line, when
they should be similar in depth instead. This is due to some overlap between these stellar lines
and the gas cell lines, allowing the gas cell template to partially compensate for them during the
spectral ﬁts. However, at higher iterations, improved ﬁts to the observations arising from improved
stellar templates lead to similar CO line depths. The higher iterations also show more noise in
the templates, which is a drawback of this algorithm, as any coherent noise in the residuals will
be added to the template. Therefore, at higher iterations continuous augmentation of the stellar
template does not lead to higher RV precision, as shown in Figure 7.

5.1.2. Parameter Correlations

Given our large number of nuisance parameters (Table 3), it is important to investigate any cor-
relations between themselves and between them and the RVs. Correlations are tested by evaluating
Pearson’s linear correlation coeﬃcient ρ, deﬁned by (Pearson 1895)

ρ =

cov(X, Y )

σX σY

,

(19)

where cov(X, Y ) is the covariance of the variables X and Y , and σX and σY are their standard
deviations. A large degree of correlation corresponds to |ρ| → 1. We calculate ρ by assigning the
RVs and diﬀerent spectral model parameters to X and Y . Figure 10 shows the relationship between
every parameter and the individual RVs of GJ 15 A. No obvious trends can be discerned for any
of the parameters, while the absolute value of ρ is < 0.4 for all of the RV–parameter pairings.
Some parameters have hit their parameter bounds, such as the parameters controlling the shape of
the LSF. For example, the amplitude of the ﬁrst degree Hermite function (a1) hits the bounds in
both directions; this is understandable since it shifts the LSF back and forth, which could create
a false RV signal, and thus it is necessary to constrain it to a narrow set of values. The FWHM
2Ln2) spans the critical sampling resolution at the precision of CSHELL (∼ 2
of the LSF (2ω
pixels/resolution element), and therefore we are both under and oversampling our science spectra.

√

– 16 –

Clustering of points can be seen in some of the panels. For ∆ln λ, the clusters correspond to
diﬀerent epochs with diﬀerent barycentric corrections (see Eq. 6 and the discussions that follow).
For ∆λg and ∆λt, the clustering corresponds to diﬀerent epochs where the central wavelengths
were set to slightly diﬀerent values. Variations in the LSF parameters are due to the variability
inherent in observing using a non-stabilized spectrograph. Figure 11 shows the variability in the
LSF within a single night (top) and between several nights (bottom). To quantify the variability,
we take the average of the standard deviation of the diﬀerence between the LSFs and their mean
within 4 pixels of the x-grid zero point. The resulting σLSF values show that the LSF is about
4 times more variable between nights than within a night, which could account for some of the
systematic RV diﬀerences between nights.

While no parameters show unexplained increasing or decreasing trends with RV, several pa-
rameters do have ranges in values where the corresponding RV scatter is greater than that of other
values of said parameters. For example, low values of the sinusoidal fringing amplitude (A) ap-
pear to correspond to RV points with lower scatter than those that correspond to high values of
A. Other examples of this phenomenon include the blaze function polynomial coeﬃcients (b0, b1,
b2) and the wavelength solution parameters (α, β). These trends in RV scatter are shown more
clearly in Figure 12, where we bin every 10 RV points in the order of increasing value of the chosen
parameters and calculate their RV scatter. We thus see that RV precision appears to increase with
increasing continuum level, decreasing (in magnitude) linear and quadratic terms in the blaze func-
tion, decreasing sinusoidal fringing amplitude, and decreasing (in magnitude) linear and quadratic
terms in the wavelength solution.

The absolute value of ρ is < 0.5 for most of the parameter–parameter pairings. The largest
|ρ| (0.9985) is obtained between the gas cell wavelength shift ∆λg and the telluric wavelength shift
∆λt, which is expected since they both act as wavelength calibration, even though the gas cell is a
more reliable ﬁducial. Aside from this correlation, the largest |ρ| values ((cid:62)0.6) occur between the
six parameters shown in Figure 12, and their correlations and ρ values are shown in Figure 13.

For the correlations between the linear and quadratic terms of the blaze function (b1 and b2)
and wavelength solution (α and β), anti-correlations may arise due to each pair being alternating
orders in a polynomial. In addition, the change in shape of the continuum slope may play a role
as well. Consider a linear slope in the continuum of a spectrum; if the data wavelength solution is
expanded in both directions equally, corresponding to a more positive α, then the linear slope of
the data will tend towards zero, which, since most of the linear slopes in the sample are negative,
results in a more positive model linear slope b1. This explains the positive correlation (large positive
ρ) between α and b1. Similarly, a positive β corresponds to an expansion at longer wavelengths and
compression at shorter wavelengths; this results in the generation of positive curvature when the
linear slope is negative, corresponding to a positive b2, and thus the positive correlation between
b2 and β. We will see in the next section that some of the remaining correlations, such as those
between the constant blaze function term b0 and the fringing amplitude A are related to the SNR
of the spectra.

– 17 –

5.1.3. Error Analysis

Typical contributions to the RV scatter of a target include photon noise, wavelength calibration
errors, instrumental eﬀects, and astrophysical sources, such as stellar activity (Bailey et al. 2012).
GJ 15 A has been shown to be stable down to 3.2 m s−1 (Howard et al. 2014), with the dispersion
dominated by the RV signal from a Super-Earth exoplanet (K = 2.94 m s−1); this can be regarded
as the total error contribution from astrophysical sources, and it is clearly far lower than our
calculated RV precision. Therefore, our RV error budget is dominated by the other terms.

We now calculate the error contribution from photon noise, σRV , due to the RV information

content of the stellar spectrum and the SNR of the observations. Following Butler et al. (1996),

(cid:34)(cid:88)

(cid:18) dIi/dVi

(cid:19)2(cid:35)− 1

2

σRV =

i

i

,

(20)

where dIi/dVi is the slope of the stellar spectrum at the ith pixel, calculated as the change in
the normalized ﬂux of the spectrum at the ith pixel, Ii, divided by the corresponding change in
wavelength, expressed in units of velocity, at the ith pixel; i is the uncertainty in the ﬂux at the
ith pixel, given by

1(cid:112)Npho

i =

=

√

1
SN R

Ii

(21)

in the photon-limited case, where Npho is the number of photons and the SNR is that of the
observation (Table 2).

Due to our much smaller wavelength range compared to that of Butler et al. (1996), we use
Eqs. 20–21 diﬀerently. In their work, they split their one observed stellar spectrum of τ Ceti into
704 2 ˚A segments and calculated σRV for each segment (i.e. the summation in Eq. 20 is over
the pixels of a single segment); they then compiled a histogram of σRV values for the segments,
and calculated the RV precision arising from combining all the segments. Our small wavelength
range forbids us from splitting our observations into multiple segments, so instead we treat each
observation as a single “segment”, giving us 103 segment in total for GJ 15 A; we then calculate
σRV for each observation/segment by summing over every pixel in the observation in Eq. 20 and
using the SNR per pixel of each observation in Eq. 21.

An additional complication is that we do not have any observations of the star by itself, as even
observations taken without the gas cell are contaminated by atmospheric telluric lines. Therefore,
we build a synthetic stellar spectrum for each observation using the stellar template for the iteration
with the best RV precision. The synthetic spectrum is calculated by (1) downsampling the stellar
template to the data wavelength solution derived from the spectral ﬁt of the model to that particular
observation, (2) convolving the result with the LSF derived from the same ﬁt, and (3) adding onto

– 18 –

the result the residuals from the ﬁt to simulate the appropriate level of noise.

The upper panel of Figure 14 gives a histogram of the calculated σRV values of the 103
individual observations taken for GJ 15 A. The most common σRV value is ∼ 120 m s−1, slightly
lower than 131 m s−1, the actual RV precision for the individual observations (not the nightly
coadded RV points) as output by our RV pipeline.

We can repeat steps (1) and (2) above for the gas cell spectrum to ﬁnd the RV scatter contribu-
tion from errors in the wavelength calibration. We omit step (3) as the gas cell does not contribute
to the photon noise. The lower panel of Figure 14 shows the result. Given the higher line density of
the gas cell spectrum it is not surprising that its σRV values are much lower than that of the stellar
spectrum. The peak σRV value is ∼ 50 m s−1. Combining this with the photon-limited errors cal-
√
1202 + 502 = 130 m s−1, essentially equal to the RV precision
culated above in quadrature gives
of the actual individual observations. We can thus conclude that our RV scatter is dominated by
photon noise, and to a lesser extent from errors in wavelength calibration.

We can also estimate the theoretical nightly averaged RV scatter by assuming the 103 individual
observations are spread out evenly among the 14 nights, such that the RV scatter should decrease

by (cid:112)103/14 ∼ 2.7, so that it equals 131/2.7 ∼ 48 m s−1, slightly higher than our actual results

(Figure 7). This is likely due to the fact that the observations are not spread out evenly among
the nights.

Figure 14 shows a small local maximum at higher values of σRV , which correspond to the low
SNR observations of the night of July 13th, 2011 (Table 2). As the RV content and wavelength
calibration of each observation are nearly identical, the chief factor causing the higher σRV values
is the low SNR. The upper panel of Figure 15 shows the relationship between RV and SNR per
pixel. There is a clear trend showing that RVs of low SNR observations have greater scatter than
RVs of high SNR observations. We can thus estimate the impact the SNR has on the RV precision
by repeating the calculations of Figure 12, but with the parameter values replaced by SNR values;
the result of this calculation is shown in the lower panel of Figure 15. To quantify the relationship
between RV scatter and SNR, we ﬁt a power law to the points with the form

σ2
RV = σ2

0 + (s1SN R)s2 ,

(22)

where σ0 is the error contribution from all other sources and is a free parameter in the ﬁt, and
s1 and s2 are constants that are also free parameters. The power law is consistent with a 1/SNR
relationship between σRV and SNR, as expected when the main source of error is due to photon
noise.

Given the impact the SNR has on the RV scatter, it is useful to investigate how SNR variations
aﬀect the free parameters in the spectral model, which is shown in Figure 16. As with Figure 10,
most of the parameters show no clear trends with SNR, except for the blaze function coeﬃcients,
fringing sinusoid amplitude, and the linear and quadratic terms in the wavelength solution. It is

– 19 –

understandable why these parameters are the most aﬀected. At low SNR, neither the continuum
nor the wavelength solution are well constrained due to the noise in the spectra, leading to large
deviations from zero (or 1.05, in the case of the constant term in the blaze function). The rise in
fringing amplitude with decreasing SNR can be seen as either an actual increase in the relative
amplitude of the fringing as the number of photons from the star decreases, or as the model
attempting to ﬁt the higher noise level with a sinusoid in low SNR spectra.

These results help to explain some of the correlations between the parameters seen in Figure 13.
For example, as the blaze function constant term b0 can only decrease and the fringing amplitude
A can only increase at low SNR, they appear to correlate with each other, whereas the true cause
of the correlation is the low SNR. Similar arguments can be made for correlations between these
two parameters and the other four parameters of Figure 13.

Sources of error stemming from instrumental eﬀects are likely dominated by contributions
from bad pixels, which were abundant in the science images and can be generally deﬁned as due
to detector imperfections and cosmic rays. Figure 17 shows the relationship between RV scatter
and the number of bad pixels Nbp ﬂagged on the 2D trace of GJ 15 A spectra. As with Figure 15,
the upper panel plots the individual RV values against Nbp, while the lower panel shows the RV
scatter for every 10 points binned in increasing Nbp. We once again ﬁt a power law to the binned
points, though we ignore all points corresponding to Nbp > 150 since our knowledge about the RV
precision for this range of Nbp is limited by the small number of spectra. The ﬁtted curve is the
same as in Eq. 22, with Nbp in place of the SNR. The initial steep rise in σRV from Nbp = 0 to Nbp
= 150 shows the signiﬁcant impact bad pixels have on both the data reduction and retrieval of RVs.
Beyond Nbp = 150, the RV scatter appears to saturate. Bad pixels not only cause certain parts of
the spectrum to be unusable, thereby decreasing the information content of the data, but they also
aﬀect the data reduction process by interfering with the initial ﬁtting to the spatial proﬁle of the
2D trace.

5.1.4. Exploring the Multiplicity of LSF and Blaze Function Terms

The LSF and blaze function components of our spectral model are constructed from the sum-
mation of multiple Hermite function and polynomial terms, respectively. However, there are no
signiﬁcant a priori constraints on how many terms these components should have. We thus per-
form sensitivity tests by running our RV pipeline using data from GJ 15 A and various numbers of
component terms in the LSF and blaze function and then comparing the resulting RV precision.

Figure 18 shows the resulting RV precision when using LSFs constructed with up to 11 Hermite
function terms in the spectral model. Since each run of the RV pipeline involved 20 iterations, a
spread in RV RMS values is generated. Accordingly, we plot each run as a box plot, where for each
box the error bars show the full spread in RV RMS values; the vertical extent of the box covers
the upper to lower quartile of RV RMS values; and the red line indicates the median RV RMS

– 20 –

value. For these tests the blaze function is set as a quadratic polynomial. It is clear that an LSF
generated by summing up the ﬁrst 5 degrees of Hermite functions correspond to the lowest median
and absolute RV RMS. This can be understood as the balancing of two eﬀects: for LSFs made up
of fewer Hermite functions, the degree of freedom is too low and the LSF is not able to account for
all distortions in the line proﬁle. Conversely, LSFs made up of more Hermite functions run the risk
of ﬁtting noise in addition to the line proﬁle, diluting the RV information content of the spectral
lines. These results are in contrast to previous works that used single Gaussians for their LSFs
(Crockett et al. 2011; Blake et al. 2010; Bailey et al. 2012; Tanner et al. 2012), which corresponds to
the 0th degree Hermite function. However, a direct comparison with the latter three works may be
inappropriate due to their reliance on a diﬀerent spectrograph with a reduced spectral resolution.
Meanwhile, Crockett et al. (2011) also used CSHELL, and found no improvements to RV precision
by using multi-Gaussian LSFs. It is unknown how their results would change if Hermite function
LSFs were used instead. An additional complication is the change in LSF shape with wavelength,
which was included in the model of Blake et al. (2010). However, this is not an issue for our work
due to our short wavelength range (6 nm) compared to theirs (34 nm), such that we can assume
the LSF shape is independent of wavelength.

Figure 19 shows the resulting RV precision when using blaze functions constructed with poly-
nomials of order 6 or less in the spectral model, in a similar format as for the LSF tests. The test
case with a constant blaze function (“order 0”) is not shown as its RV RMS value is more than 5
times larger than the plotted cases. For these tests the LSF was set as the sum of the ﬁrst 5 degrees
of Hermite functions. Unlike the LSF tests, the best solution is not immediately clear, though the
quadratic blaze function provides the lowest minimum and median RV scatter. Blaze functions
with order >4 increase the RV scatter due to the high sensitivity of the blaze function amplitude
to the higher order terms. Previous works have used both linear (Valenti et al. 1995; Bailey et al.
2012) and quadratic (Crockett et al. 2011) blaze functions, with the choice likely depending on the
degree to which the spectra were already normalized to the continuum during the data reduction
phase. For example, the California Planet Search RV pipeline uses three order-6 polynomials of
decreasing amplitude to normalize their spectra to the continuum before the RV extraction phase,
during which only a constant normalization factor is needed (John A. Johnson, 2013, private com-
munications). This method is valid for optical wavelengths where the continuum of the spectrum
is well deﬁned between the spectral lines. However, as the spectral lines dominate over the con-
tinuum in our wavelength range (Figure 2), higher order blaze functions could have exaggerated
amplitudes due to ﬁtting to deep lines or absorption bands, thereby introducing distortions to the
spectral model ﬂux when using them for normalization.

5.2. RV Stability at High Signal-to-Noise: SV Peg

The ensemble RVs of SV Peg and their associated 1σ error bars are given in Table 4 and are
shown in Figure 20. RV variations with amplitude ∼ 1.5 km s−1 spanning hundreds of days can

– 21 –

be seen, which are consistent with the 145 day variability time scale and amplitude from previous
observations (e.g., Hinkle et al. 1997) and reaﬃrms SV Peg’s quasi-periodic pulsations as an M
giant. Therefore, in order to investigate RV stability using SV Peg observations, we consider its
RVs on a shorter time scale. For example, if we assume purely periodic variability, such that the
RVs vary by 3 km s−1 within half of the total variability period, 145 days, then within 1 hour the
RVs will change by only ∼ 1.7 m s−1. The actual change is likely to vary by at least a factor of
two due to changes in the RV slope occurring on shorter time scales (see, for example, Figure 8 of
Hinkle et al. 1997).

Figure 21 shows the individual RVs of SV Peg on ﬁve nights when > 100 spectra were taken,
each with RV RMS ∼ 18–40 m s−1. As these values are an order of magnitude larger than the
predicted RV variations within a few hours, it is not surprising that no long term trends are apparent
in the data. The left column of Figure 22 shows the RV precision as a function of increasing
SNR per pixel for each observation, calculated from progressively binning an increasing number
of individual RV points, up to one-third of all points obtained that night per bin. The resulting
RV noise ﬂoors lie at ∼2–6 m s−1. The SNRs needed to reach the noise ﬂoor are ∼400–600 for
the 5 nights, which reﬂects diﬀering weather conditions, pointing/guiding/focusing issues, detector
artifacts, and contributions from read noise and dark noise. The theoretical integration time to
reach the noise ﬂoor for SV Peg, calculated as the product of the integration time per individual
exposure (∼3–5s) and the square of the ratio of the total SNR required (∼400–600) to the SNR per
individual exposure (see Table 2), is ∼200 s. Both the individual and binned RV RMS values are
consistent with previous analyses of these data performed by Anglada-Escud´e et al. (2012), as well
as the level of precision expected given SV Peg’s intrinsic RV variability within hours, as calculated
in the previous paragraph. In other words, as a result of the high SNR of the observations and the
high information content of the deep CO lines of SV Peg stellar spectra, our RV precision for SV
Peg may be signiﬁcantly limited by stellar variability in addition to photon noise or wavelength
calibration.

To test this possibility we repeat the calculations shown in the left column of Figure 22 and
add an extra step where we subtract a linear trend from the binned RV points at each SNR before
calculating σRV . The linear trend is ﬁtted to the binned RV points weighted by the inverse square
of the scatter in each bin and represents the short-term RV variability due to stellar pulsations. The
results are shown in the right column of Figure 22, where for all but the night of 11/08/20 there is
some reduction in the RV slope. However, this is not deﬁnitive evidence that we have uncovered the
signature of stellar pulsations, as the subtracted linear trend could be due to some other systematic,
such as variations in the gravity vector, focus, and/or temperature. Figure 23 shows the linear RV
slope for the subtracted linear trend at each SNR. If the slope is due to pulsation, then they should
all have similar magnitudes (a few m s−1 hr−1) and be consistent across many values of the SNR.
It is clear that this is not the case for most of the nights, where the magnitudes are either too large
(10/10/09, 10/10/10, 10/10/13) and/or too variable (10/10/10, 11/08/20). By contrast, for the
night of 11/07/10, the slope’s magnitude is consistent with stellar pulsations and is stable across

– 22 –

many SNR values. In addition, it features the largest decrease in noise ﬂoor upon subtraction of
the linear trend, and the total duration of the observations (4 hours) may be suﬃcient for RV
variability due to stellar pulsations to be made apparent. However, more precise RV measurements
and complementary observations of activity indicators are needed to fully evaluate whether the
linear slope is indeed due to stellar variability.

Figure 24 shows the correlation between RV and the RV pipeline parameters for SV Peg
observations taken on August 20th, 2011. This date was chosen as it had the most RV points.
These results show much less structure than those shown in Figure 10, which is due to the much
shorter time baseline of the observations. Like for GJ 15 A, no obvious correlations exist, except
for the relative wavelength shift, ∆ln λ. This is due to scatter in the retrieved RVs of SV Peg. To
illustrate, suppose the retrieved RVs are made up of two components: a scattered component, and
an ideal component that, when added to the barycentric correction, results in zero RVs. Therefore,
the barycenter-corrected RVs would just be made up of this scattered component, and thus they
are linearly correlated with each other. The same correlation exists in the analogous panel of Figure
10, but is isolated to single epochs.

Figures 25 and 26 show the nightly RVs for two separate observing runs, one in October 2010
and one in November 2010, respectively. Each run consists of spectra taken on nearly consecutive
nights, revealing a short-term linear RV trend resulting from SV Peg’s intrinsic variability. Given
the ∼ 1.7 m s−1 per hour RV slope calculated above, over several days we expect to observe RV
changes of ∼ 100 m s−1, roughly consistent with the slopes shown in Figures 25 and 26. Once the
linear trends are subtracted, the resulting RV scatter is ∼ 3–4 m s−1, similar to the noise ﬂoors
of the intra-night results. The detrended nightly RVs of the Oct. 2010 and Nov. 2010 runs and
their associated 1σ error bars are given in Table 5. Both our intra-night and intra-run results are
consistent with the observed RV stability of other M giant stars on similar time scales (e.g., Seifahrt
& K¨auﬂ 2008).

The error bars for the SV Peg nightly RVs shown in Table 5 are smaller than those of the
same nightly RVs shown in Table 4. This results from the diﬀerent sets of spectra input into the
RV extraction pipeline for these two cases, and the way we derive our stellar templates. In Table
4, all SV Peg spectra were input simultaneously, deriving one single stellar spectrum used to ﬁt
all observed spectra despite SV Peg’s variability; in Table 5, only the spectra from the individual
runs were input, and separately, thus producing two diﬀerent stellar spectra for the two runs. The
smaller error bars for the nightly RVs in Table 5 then suggest that the nightly RV scatter is smaller
when using a stellar template derived speciﬁcally from the spectra within those runs, rather than
one derived using all available SV Peg spectra. In other words, the stellar spectrum of SV Peg
is changing over its long-term variability cycle such that no one stellar template can be used to
satisfactorily ﬁt all observations. We explore this eﬀect in Figure 27, where ﬁve stellar templates
derived from the ﬁve separately analyzed nights shown in Figures 21 and 22 are compared. Some
small diﬀerences are expected due to noise in the observations, but larger diﬀerences are also
present, as marked by the arrows. The wavelengths of these large diﬀerences do not correspond to

– 23 –

any major gas cell or telluric features and thus are likely due to changes in SV Peg itself. We also
do not see this phenomenon in any of the other targets analyzed using our RV extraction pipeline
(Gagn´e et al. submitted to ApJ). Furthermore, the two groups of templates, one derived from
2010 data and one derived from 2011 data, show greater diﬀerences between them than between
templates within each group, indicating, as expected, that the stellar spectrum changed more over
months than over days. Although a full interpretation of these results is beyond the scope of this
paper, it would be interesting to ascertain what these changes to the stellar spectrum mean for the
chemistry and dynamics of the atmosphere of SV Peg.

5.3. Validation of Planet-Detection Capabilities: GJ 876

The top panel of Figure 28 shows our GJ 876 nightly RVs (blue), while Table 4 gives their
values and their associated 1σ error bars. The amplitude of the RV variations are consistent with
those observed in optical surveys, aside from the outlier at JD–2455455.0 ∼ 300 with the large error
bars (Delfosse et al. 1998; Marcy et al. 1998, 2001; Rivera et al. 2005, 2010). Using the Systemic
Console (Meschiari et al. 2009), Gagn´e et al. (submitted to ApJ) was able to ﬁt a 1-planet solution
to the data without any prior constraints and retrieve orbital parameters within 2σ of the published
values for planet b, thereby conﬁrming, for the ﬁrst time, the existence of GJ 876 b using NIR RVs.

To further test the pipeline results, we ﬁt a 2-planet solution to our data using the Systemic
Console, corresponding to planets b and c. The best ﬁt RV curve is shown in the top panel of
Figure 28 (dashed line). Due to the low cadence of our data and the rapid dynamical evolution
of the system, it is diﬃcult to accurately retrieve the orbital parameters of both of these planets.
Instead, we ﬁx the planet masses, orbital periods, and orbital eccentricities to the published values
and allow the mean anomaly, longitude of periastron, and the velocity zero point to vary. Our best
ﬁt solution does not show the alignment of the two planets’ longitudes of periastron reported in
previous studies (e.g., Laughlin et al. 2005; Rivera et al. 2005), but that is likely due to the low
cadence of our observations. The ﬁt results in a residual RMS of 68 m s−1 (bottom panel of Figure
28); removing the outlier at JD–2455455.0 ∼ 300 reduces this value to 35 m s−1, within the RV
precision of our RV standard, GJ 15 A. We do not pursue 3-planet and 4-planet solutions, as the
two lower mass planets in the system are beyond the detection limits of our pipeline.

These results demonstrate that our RV pipeline is capable of detecting Jupiter-mass planets
around M dwarfs with orbital periods of tens of days using CSHELL. However, it is clear that a
conﬁrmed detection will require high cadence, dedicated observations of RV variables in order to
better constrain the orbital parameters of any possible planets they may host.

– 24 –

6. Summary and Outlook

We have constructed a data analysis pipeline that can process into RVs the NIR spectra of M
dwarfs observed using CSHELL on NASA IRTF with the aid of a methane isotopologue gas cell by
optimizing ﬁts between the observed spectra and a spectral model. The pipeline is able to retrieve
the stellar spectrum in an iterative process directly from the science observations without the need
for additional observations, and takes into account temporal variations in the instrumental LSF,
curvature in the continuum (blaze function), sinusoidal fringing, and wavelength solution. The
pipeline is capable of (1) obtaining an RV precision ∼ 35 m s−1 for the RV standard M dwarf
GJ 15 A, with the error contributions coming mostly from photon noise, (2) obtaining, for the
high SNR target, SV Peg, noise ﬂoors of ∼ 2–6 m s−1 on individual nights, and ∼ 3 m s−1 RV
precision over several days after subtracting out a linear trend consistent with RV variability due
to stellar pulsations, and (3) detecting/conﬁrming at least one Jupiter mass planet around the M
dwarf GJ 876 in the NIR. These results are derived from observations with a 22-year old InSb
detector within CSHELL, a spectrograph that was not designed with precision NIR RVs in mind,
and which is mounted at the Cassegrain focus, thereby introducing signiﬁcant mechanical, thermal,
and pressure variations that all contribute to the RV scatter. Furthermore, the RV information
content is restricted to ﬁve CO lines across a single order of 256 pixels that covers only 6 nm (Greene
et al. 1993). However, despite these limitations, our results compare favorably to previous works
that use larger telescopes, newer detectors, and spectrographs with greater mechanical, thermal,
and pressure stability. Therefore, it will be useful to evaluate the possible improvements to our
RV stability resulting from the reduction or elimination of the aforementioned limitations in newer
NIR spectrographs. We will base our discussions on iSHELL, as it is due to replace CSHELL in
the near future.

iSHELL is a cross-dispersed high resolution echelle spectrograph with R ∼ 70000 at minimum
slit width (0.(cid:48)(cid:48)375) (Rayner et al. 2012). As with CSHELL, it will be ﬁxed to the Cassegrain focus
of the 3 m telescope at NASA IRTF. It uses a Teledyne 2048x2048 Hawaii 2RG array as its main
detector and enables multiple orders to be observed simultaneously. A single exposure in the K band
allows for ∼ 200 nm to be captured, thereby improving our wavelength coverage by a factor of 200/6
= 33; extrapolating from our calculations in §5.1.3 with the assumption that the RV information
33 ∼ 22.5
content stays roughly constant with wavelength, this results in a typical σRV = 130/
m s−1 for the individual RVs due to photon noise and wavelength calibration errors. Given an SNR
per pixel of 50 for each observation, and a total SNR of 200 per night, the nightly RV scatter would
thus be 22.5/(200/50) ∼ 5.6 m s−1. This is consistent with the estimates of Reiners et al. (2010)
and Bottom et al. (2013) and will facilitate the detection of Super-Earths and Mini-Neptunes in
the Habitable Zones of M dwarfs.

√

On the other hand, while the higher spectral resolution of iSHELL will increase the RV infor-
mation content of the observed spectra, the SNR per pixel will decrease at the same time due to
spreading out the same number of photons across more pixels. The impact of this eﬀect on the
RV precision depends on the sharpness of the spectral features of the target, which is a function of

– 25 –

its rotational velocity. A target that rotates quickly (vsini ∼ 10 km s−1) may be insensitive to a
change of R from 46000 to 70000, while a target that rotates slowly (vsini < 1 km s−1) may see its
RV scatter increase by 50% (Bouchy et al. 2001). In addition, the increase in wavelength coverage
will cause severe contamination of the observed spectra by atmospheric water and methane telluric
absorption lines and OH emission lines, which are outside of the 6 nm wavelength range of our
current CSHELL observations. Bean et al. (2010) corrected for telluric contamination by modeling
the absorption and emission lines using line lists from the HITRAN database in conjunction with a
time-resolved model of the atmosphere above the observatory and the LBLRTM radiative transfer
code. Further improvements to the modeled telluric lines were made by ﬁtting to a telluric stan-
dard star in order to determine systematic wavelength shifts and strength variations of the lines
compared to their default values in the HITRAN database. A similar method can be applied to
iSHELL observations, with additional improvements to the synthetic telluric template made possi-
ble by iterative processes akin to what we have done to improve the gas cell template (§4.1), though
it will be more challenging in this case due to the presence of multiple components (methane and
water absorption lines and OH emission lines). Alternatively, a synthetic telluric spectrum can be
constructed from principle component analysis using a library of observations of telluric standard
stars, which was shown by Artigau et al. (2014) to improve RV precision in the R band without
the addition of spurious RV signals, though it remains to be seen how well this method works in
the H and K bands. Finally, the deepest telluric lines can simply be masked during RV extraction,
though this reduces the RV information content of the observations.

There exist several factors in addition to the increased wavelength coverage, however, that
will help increase the RV precision of targets observed using iSHELL. The upgrades to the ﬁlter
selection wheel will largely eliminate the sinusoidal fringing and thus its contributions to the RV
error. The newer detector will lead to a decrease in the number of bad pixels on the 2D trace,
further improving the RV precision by increasing the available information content and reducing the
need to interpolate along the spatial direction during data reduction. The increased eﬃciency of the
detector will allow for higher SNR for the same targets currently observable using CSHELL, while
also making it possible to observe dimmer targets. Recent tests of iSHELL showed that an SNR per
pixel of 100 for targets with K magnitude ∼ 9.5 is achievable within one hour (Peter P. Plavchan,
2015, private communications). Comparisons with the targets of Gagn´e et al. (submitted to ApJ)
show that this will permit future RV surveys with NASA IRTF to observe targets 2–3 K magnitudes
dimmer, thereby increasing the sample size of potential RV targets. Additional upgrades to iSHELL,
such as the implementation of ﬁber feeds for improved stabilization of detector illumination and
a laser comb for higher-ﬁdelity wavelength calibration could be possible, and have already been
demonstrated using CSHELL (Plavchan et al. 2013b; Yi et al. 2015). Given the proliferation
of precision NIR RV surveys in the near future, a survey undertaken using iSHELL will nicely
complement these eﬀorts.

We thank K. Sung, S. Crawford, B. Drouin, E. Garcia-Berrios, N. S. Lewis, S. Mills, and
S. Lin for their eﬀort in the building and setting up of the methane isotopologue gas cell. We

– 26 –

thank B. Walp for his help with data collection at NASA IRTF. We thank J. Rayner, L. Bergknut,
B. Bus, and the telescope operators at NASA IRTF for their help throughout this project. This
work uses observations obtained at NASA IRTF through programs number 2010B022, 2011A083,
2011B083, and 2012B021. This work was supported in part by a JPL Research and Technology
Development Grant and the JPL Center for Exoplanet Science. Additional support includes the
Venus Express program via NASA NNX10AP80G grant to the California Institute of Technology,
and an NAI Virtual Planetary Laboratory grant from the University of Washington to the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory and California Institute of Technology under solicitation NNH12ZDA002C
and Cooperative Agreement Number NNA13AA93A. The authors recognize and acknowledge the
very signiﬁcant cultural role and reverence that the summit of Mauna Kea has always had within
the indigenous Hawaiian community. We are most fortunate to have the opportunity to conduct
observations from this mountain.

REFERENCES

Akeson R. L. et al., 2013, PASP 125, 989

Anglada-Escud´e G. et al., 2012, PASP 124, 586

Anglada-Escud´e G. et al., 2013, AN 334, 184

Arfken G. B. et al., 2012, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, A Comprehensive Guide (Academic

Press)

Artigau ´E. et al., 2014, Proc. SPIE 9149, 914905

Bailey III J. I. et al., 2012, ApJ 749, 16

Bajzer Z. & Penzar I., 1999, http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/ﬁleexchange/102-simps

Basri G. et al., 2010, ApJL 713, L155

Bean J. L. et al., 2007, AJ 134, 749

Bean J. L. et al., 2010, ApJ 713, 410

Beers T. C. et al., 1990, AJ 100, 32

Blake C. H. et al., 2010, ApJ 723, 684

Bonﬁls X. et al., 2013, A&A 549, A109

Bottom M. et al., 2013, PASP 125, 240

Bouchy F. et al., 2001, A&A 374, 733

– 27 –

Brown T. M. et al., 2002, PASP 114, 826

Butler R. P. et al., 1996, PASP 108, 500

Crockett C. J. et al., 2011, ApJ 735, 78

Crockett C. J. et al., 2012, ApJ 761, 164

Davison C. L. et al., 2015, AJ 149, 106

Delfosse X. et al., 1998, A&A 338, L67

Ducati J. R., 2002, CDS/ADC Collection of Electronic Catalogues, 2237, 0

Dumusque X. et al., 2012, Nature 491, 207

Endl M. et al., 2006, ApJ 649, 436

Gagn´e. et al., 2015, submitted to ApJ

Greene T. P. et al., 1993, Proc. SPIE 1946, 313

Gullikson K. & Endl M., 2013, PASP 125, 924

Henry T. J. et al., 2006, AJ 132, 2360

Hinkle K. H. et al., 1997, AJ 114, 2686

Hoaglin D. C. et al., 1983, Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis. John Wiley &

Sons Inc., New York, USA

Horne K., 1986, PASP 98, 609

Howard A. W. et al., 2012, ApJS 201, 15

Howard A. W. et al., 2014, ApJ 794, 51

Hu´elamo N. et al., 2008, A&A 489, L9

Jenkins J. S. et al., 2009, ApJ 704, 975

Johnson J. A. et al., 2006, ApJ 647, 600

Latham D. W. et al., 1989, Nature 339, 38

Laughlin G. et al., 2005, ApJ 622 1182

Lebzelter T. & Hinkle K. H., 2002, A&A 393, 563

Lafreni´ere D. et al., 2007, ApJ 670, 1367

– 28 –

Livingston W. & Wallace L., 1991, An Atlas of the Solar Spectrum in the Infrared from 1850 to
9000 cm−1 (1.1 to 5.4 micrometer). National Solar Observatory, National Optical Astronomy
Observatory, Tucson, AZ, USA

Lucy L. B., 1974, AJ 79, 745

Mahadevan S. & Ge J., 2009, ApJ 692, 1590

Mahmud N. I. et al., 2011, ApJ 736, 123

Marcy G. W. & Butler R. P., 1992, PASP 104, 270

Marcy G. W. et al., 1998, ApJL 505, L147

Marcy G. W. et al., 2001, ApJ 556, 296

Mart´ın E. L. et al., 2006, ApJL 644, L75

Massey P. & Hanson M. M., 2013, Planets, Stars, and Stellar Systems 2, 35

Mayor M. & Queloz D., 1995, Nature 378, 355

McLean I. S. et al., 1998, Proc. SPIE 3354, 566

Meschiari S. et al., 2009, PASP 121, 1016

Moﬀat A. F. J., 1969, A&A 3, 455

Quirrenbach A. et al., 2010, Proc. SPIE 7735, 14pp

Pearson K., 1895, P. R. Soc. London 58, 240

Plavchan P. P. et al., 2013a, Proc. SPIE 8864, 88641J

Plavchan P. P. et al., 2013b, Proc. SPIE 8864, 88640G

Prato L. et al., 2008, ApJL 687, L103

Rayner J. et al., 2012, Proc. SPIE 8446, 2

Reiners A. et al., 2010, ApJ 710, 432

Richardson W. H., 1972, JOSA 62, 55

Rivera E. J. et al., 2005, ApJ 634, 625

Rivera E. J. et al., 2010, ApJ 719, 890

Robertson P. et al., 2015, ApJ 805, L22

– 29 –

Rodler F. et al., 2011, A&A 532, A31

Rodler F. et al., 2012, A&A 538, A141

Santerne A. et al., 2013, arXiv:1310.0748

Sato B. et al., 2002, PASJ 54, 873

Seifahrt A. & K¨auﬂ H. U., 2008, A&A 491, 929

Tanner A. et al., 2012, ApJS 203, 10

Valdivielso L. et al., 2010, ApJ 715, 1366

Valenti J. et al.,1995, PASP 107, 966

Valenti J. & Anderson J., 2010, Presentation at “Astronomy of Exoplanets with Precise Radial

Velocities”, Penn State University

Vanderburg A. et al., 2015, in prep

West A. A. et al., 2004, AJ 128, 426

Winnberg A. et al., 2008, A&A 482, 831

Wright J. T. & Eastman J. D., 2014, PASP 126, 838

Yi X. et al., 2015, arXiv:1501.02509

Zechmeister M. et al., 2009, A&A 505, 859

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

– 30 –

Fig. 1.— Removal of sinusoidal fringing from spectroscopic ﬂat ﬁelds. (A) The master ﬂat ﬁeld
generated from averaging all ﬂat ﬁelds obtained in the 2010–2012 survey. (B) Result of dividing
a median-combined nightly ﬂat ﬁeld by the master ﬂat ﬁeld. (C) The 2D fringing model ﬁt to B.
(D) Same as B, but after dividing out C to correct for the fringing.

– 31 –

Fig. 2.— Sample observed spectra of GJ 15 A (top), GJ 876 (middle), and SV Peg (bottom) used
in this work. The SNR per pixel and JD (2000) date of each spectra are shown at the bottom of
each plot.

0.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Normalized FluxGJ 15 ASNR = 68JD = 2455522.908540.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Normalized FluxGJ 876SNR = 52JD = 2455522.71241050100150200250Pixels0.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Normalized FluxSV PegSNR = 101JD = 2455479.89718– 32 –

Fig. 3.— Schematic of the RV extraction pipeline.

Stellar Template (ln)ΔλBlaze Function (b0,b1,b2)Fringe Correction (A,B,C)Line Spread Function(,aσ1,a2,a3,a4)Forward Spectrum ModelObserved Spectrum (,αβ)Radial VelocitiesSIMPS++ConvolutionGas Cell Spectrum (Δλg,τg)Telluric Spectrum (Δλt,τt)– 33 –

Fig. 4.— (Upper panel) Normalized telluric (blue, oﬀset by +1) and methane isotopologue gas cell
(red) absorption spectra used in the construction of our spectral model in the wavelength range of
interest. (Lower panel) Diﬀerence between the laboratory gas cell spectra and the corrected gas
cell spectra used in this work.

0.00.51.01.52.0Normalized FluxMethane Gas CellTelluric Absorption2.3092.3102.3112.3122.3132.3142.3152.316Wavelength (µm)0.060.030.000.030.06Gas Cell Difference– 34 –

Fig. 5.— H band spectrum of 32 Peg taken without the methane isotopologue gas cell, showing
the prominent sinusoidal fringing as a result of the CSHELL CVF ﬁlter. Similar fringing is found
in all of our K band data. The absorption line near pixel 100 is an atmospheric telluric feature.

50100150200250Pixels0.850.900.951.001.05Normalized Flux– 35 –

Fig. 6.— Examples of optimized ﬁts to GJ 15 A spectra. (Top) Fitting a spectral model (red) to
a high SNR observation (black line), with resulting residuals (black points). (Bottom) Fitting a
spectral model to a low SNR observation.

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Normalized FluxObserved SpectrumForward Spectrum ModelSNR = 95, RMS = 0.76%Residuals2.3092.3102.3112.3122.3132.3142.3152.316Wavelength (µm)0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Normalized FluxSNR = 16, RMS = 4.37%– 36 –

Fig. 7.— GJ 15 A RV RMS, deﬁned as the standard deviation of the nightly RV points, as a
function of iterations of the RV extraction pipeline (points).

05101520Iteration303540455055606570RV RMS (m s−1)– 37 –

Fig. 8.— The nightly RVs of GJ 15 A from the iteration of the RV extraction pipeline with the
lowest RV RMS.

0200400600800JD - 2455455.020015010050050100150200RV (m s−1)RV RMS = 35 m s−1χ2 = 2.83– 38 –

Fig. 9.— Evolution of the GJ 15 A stellar template with increasing iterations (upwards) of the RV
extraction pipeline. All templates aside from the ﬁrst (bottom) are shifted upwards by 0.5 to avoid
overlap.

2.3092.3102.3112.3122.3132.3142.3152.316Wavelength (µm)123456Normalized FluxIncreasing iterations– 39 –

Fig. 10.— Correlations between the free parameters of the RV extraction pipeline with the indi-
vidual RV values of GJ 15 A. See Table 3 for the deﬁnitions of the parameter symbols.

40004000.650.750.850.951.05ω (pix)40004000.100.050.000.050.10a140004000.100.050.000.05a240004000.100.050.000.050.10a340004000.0000.0250.0500.0750.100a440004000.981.021.061.10b0400040014106226b1×103400040084048b2×10540004001050510∆lnλ×10540004001.00.50.00.5∆λg()40004001.00.50.00.5∆λt()40004000.960.970.98τg40004000.40.50.60.70.80.9τt40004000.51.52.53.5A×10040004005.05.56.06.5B()4000400RV (m s−1)53113C4000400RV (m s−1)0.250.150.050.05α(pix−1)4000400RV (m s−1)0.40.00.40.8β(pix−2)– 40 –

Fig. 11.— Variability of ﬁve GJ 15 A line spread functions within a single night (top) and across
several nights (bottom). Diﬀerent colored lines are used to distinguish between diﬀerent LSFs.
σLSF is deﬁned as the average of the standard deviations of the ﬁve LSF magnitudes from a mean
LSF within 4 pixels to either side of the zero point on the x axis. The mean LSF is derived from
the average of the ﬁve LSFs in each case.

σLSF = 2.6%42024PixelsσLSF = 10%– 41 –

Fig. 12.— Standard deviations of every 10 individual RV points of GJ 15 A ordered in increasing
values of the blaze function coeﬃcients (b0, b1, b2), the fringing amplitude (A), and the wavelength
solution coeﬃcients (α, β). The standard deviations of all of the individual GJ 15 A RVs are shown
by the blue dotted lines.

1.001.021.041.060100200300σRV (m s−1)b01510505b1×1034202b2×10501230100200300σRV (m s−1)A0.20.10.0α(pix−1)0.20.00.20.4β(pix−2)– 42 –

Fig. 13.— Correlations and Pearson’s linear correlation coeﬃcient (ρ) between some of the spectral
model parameters (constant (b0), linear (b1), and quadratic (b2) terms of the blaze function, the
fringing amplitude (A), and the linear (α) and quadratic (β) terms of the wavelength solution)
from ﬁts to GJ 15 A spectra.

14106226b1×103ρ = 0.7984048b2×105ρ = −0.620.51.52.53.5A×100ρ = −0.650.250.150.050.05α(pix−1)ρ = 0.830.981.021.061.10b00.40.00.40.8β(pix−2)ρ = −0.63ρ = −0.60ρ = −0.85ρ = 0.9414106226b1×103ρ = −0.93ρ = 0.36ρ = −0.5484048b2×105ρ = 0.52ρ = −0.820.51.52.53.5A×100ρ = 0.840.250.150.050.05α(pix−1)ρ = −0.86– 43 –

Fig. 14.— Histograms of expected RV errors in all 103 GJ 15 A spectra from just photon noise
(top) and just wavelength calibration (bottom).

1002003004000510152025Number of SpectraStar50100150200σRV (m s−1)0510152025Number of SpectraGas Cell– 44 –

Fig. 15.— (Top) Distribution of the individual GJ 15 A RVs as a function of the SNR per pixel
of each observation. (Bottom) The standard deviation of every 10 individual RV points ordered in
increasing values of the SNR. The resulting trend is ﬁtted with a power law (Eq. 22, red dotted
line), the best ﬁt parameters of which are given in red. The standard deviations of all of the
individual GJ 15 A RVs are shown by the blue dotted line.

4002000200400Individual RV (m s−1)1020304050607080SNR050100150200250300σRV (m s−1)σ0 = 45 ± 35 m s−1s1× 10−3 = 8 ± 13s2 = -1.3 ± 0.5– 45 –

Fig. 16.— Correlations between the free parameters of the RV extraction pipeline with the SNR
per pixel of the individual observations of GJ 15 A. See Table 3 for the deﬁnitions of the parameter
symbols. Blue dotted lines mark the zero values in the b1, b2, α, and β plots.

1045800.650.750.850.951.05ω (pix)1045800.100.050.000.050.10a11045800.100.050.000.05a21045800.100.050.000.050.10a31045800.0000.0250.0500.0750.100a41045800.981.021.061.10b010458014106226b1×10310458084048b2×1051045801050510∆lnλ×1051045801.00.50.00.5∆λg()1045801.00.50.00.5∆λt()1045800.960.970.98τg1045800.40.50.60.70.80.9τt1045800.51.52.53.5A×1001045805.05.56.06.5B()104580SNR53113C104580SNR0.250.150.050.05α(pix−1)104580SNR0.40.00.40.8β(pix−2)– 46 –

Fig. 17.— (Top) Correlation between the individual GJ 15 A RVs and the number of bad pixels on
the 2D spectral trace of each observation. (Bottom) The standard deviation of every 10 individual
RV points ordered in increasing numbers of bad pixels. The resulting trend is ﬁtted with a power
law (Eq. 22, with Nbp in place of the SNR, shown by the red dotted line), the best ﬁt parameters
of which are given in red. The standard deviation of all of the individual GJ 15 A RVs are shown
by the blue dotted lines.

4002000200400Individual RV (m s−1)0100200300400500600# Bad Pixels on 2D Trace050100150200250σRV (m s−1)σ0 = 43 ± 12 m s−1s1× 105 = 4 ± 11s2 = 3.6 ± 0.6– 47 –

Fig. 18.— Sensitivity of the GJ 15 A RV RMS to the degrees of Hermite functions used to construct
the spectral model LSF. Each test case was run for 20 iterations, with each box plot representing
the full range of RV RMSs for all 20 iterations of each case. The upper and lower bounds of the
error bars show the highest and lowest RV RMSs achieved during each test case, respectively; the
upper and lower bounds of the blue boxes show the ﬁrst and third quartile RV RMSs for each set
of 20 iterations for each case, respectively; and the red horizontal line in each blue box show the
median RV RMS of each case.

012345678910Hermite Function Degree30405060708090RV RMS (m s−1)– 48 –

Fig. 19.— Same as Figure 18, but for the sensitivity of the GJ 15 A RV RMS to the orders of
polynomials used to construct the spectral model blaze function.

123456Blaze Function Order304050607080RV RMS (m s−1)– 49 –

Fig. 20.— The nightly RVs of SV Peg.

50050100150200250300350400JD - 2455455.01500100050005001000150020002500RV (m s−1)– 50 –

Fig. 21.— Individual SV Peg RVs on the indicated nights. The date format is year/month/day.

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.210050050100RV (m s−1)10/10/090.00.10.20.30.450050RV (m s−1)10/10/100.00.10.20.30.450050RV (m s−1)10/10/1301234502502550RV (m s−1)11/07/100.00.51.01.52.02.5Time After First Observation (hrs)2001000100200RV (m s−1)11/08/20– 51 –

Fig. 22.— (Left) RV noise ﬂoors (NF) of the indicated nights, calculated by binning progressively
more individual RV points and calculating the standard deviation of the resulting binned RV points.
The blue dotted lines mark the approximate RV noise ﬂoors, as indicated by the asymptotic value
of σRV of the binned RV points. (Right) Same as the left column, but σRV is calculated after a
linear trend is subtracted from the binned RVs.

10-1100101102σRV (m s−1)10/10/09NF ∼ 6 m s−1Nominal10/10/09NF ∼ 3.5 m s−1Linear Trend Removed10-1100101102σRV (m s−1)10/10/10NF ∼ 4 m s−110/10/10NF ∼ 2.5 m s−110-1100101102σRV (m s−1)10/10/13NF ∼ 2 m s−110/10/13NF ∼ 1.5 m s−110-1100101102σRV (m s−1)11/07/10NF ∼ 6 m s−111/07/10NF ∼ 1.5 m s−102004006008001000Total SNR per Pixel10-1100101102σRV (m s−1)11/08/20NF ∼ 4 m s−102004006008001000Total SNR per Pixel11/08/20NF ∼ 4 m s−1– 52 –

Fig. 23.— The slope of the linear trend subtracted from the binned RVs used to calculate the noise
ﬂoors shown in Figure 22, for the indicated nights.

502502510/10/09RV Slope(m s−1 hr−1)025507510/10/10RV Slope(m s−1 hr−1)1005005010/10/13RV Slope(m s−1 hr−1)840411/07/10RV Slope(m s−1 hr−1)02004006008001000Total SNR per Pixel105051011/08/20RV Slope(m s−1 hr−1)– 53 –

Fig. 24.— Same as Figure 10, but for SV Peg observations taken on 11/08/20. Note the diﬀerent
scales on the axes.

20002000.650.750.850.95ω (pix)20002000.100.050.000.050.10a120002000.100.050.000.05a220002000.050.000.05a320002000.0000.0250.0500.0750.100a420002001.041.061.081.10b0200020010622b1×103200020010622b2×10520002002.72.62.5∆lnλ×10520002000.100.050.000.050.10∆λg()20002000.100.050.000.050.10∆λt()20002000.960.970.98τg20002000.400.450.500.550.60τt20002000.51.01.52.02.5A×10020002004567B()2000200RV (m s−1)5311C2000200RV (m s−1)0.150.100.050.00α(pix−1)2000200RV (m s−1)0.00.10.20.30.4β(pix−2)– 54 –

Fig. 25.— (Top) SV Peg nightly RVs from the October 2010 run, with the best-ﬁt linear trend
overplotted (blue dotted line). (Bottom) The residual RVs after subtraction of the linear trend.

01234502502550RV (m s−1)01234Time After First Observation (days)10010Res. (m s−1)RV RMS = 3.74 m s−1χ2 = 0.72– 55 –

Fig. 26.— Same as Figure 25, but for the November 2010 run.

012502502550RV (m s−1)012Time After First Observation (days)1050510Res. (m s−1)RV RMS = 3.09 m s−1χ2 = 0.61– 56 –

Fig. 27.— Comparison of separately retrieved stellar templates from the ﬁve indicated nights.
Major deviations between the templates are indicated by the arrows.

2.3092.3102.3112.3122.3132.3142.3152.316Wavelength (µm)0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4Normalized Flux10/10/0910/10/1010/10/1311/07/1011/08/20– 57 –

Fig. 28.— (Top) The nightly RVs of GJ 876 (blue points) and a best-ﬁt 2-planet RV solution curve
optimized using Systemic Console (black dotted line). (Bottom) Residual RVs after subtraction of
the RV solution curve from the nightly RVs. Removal of the outlier at JD–2455455 ∼ 300 reduces
the RMS of the residuals to 35 m s−1.

01002003004005006007006004002000200RV (m s−1)0100200300400500600700JD - 2455455.03002001000100Res. (m s−1)RV RMS = 68 m s−1χ2 = 9.53– 58 –

Table 1. Properties of Target Stars Used for RV Pipeline Testing

Star

R.A.

Decl.

Spectral Type K mag.

Reference

Notes

GJ 15 A 00 18 22.9 +44 01 22.6
22 05 42.1 +35 20 54.5
SV Peg
GJ 876
22 53 16.7
-14 15 49.3

M2.0V

M7

M5.0V

4.02
-0.55
5.01

Jenkins et al. (2009)

RV Standard

Ducati (2002)

High SNR Target

Lafreni´ere et al. (2007)

Planet Host

– 59 –

Table 2. Observations Used for RV Pipeline Testinga

Night

Min. SNRb Max. SNRb Med. SNRb Total SNRb Nobs

2010 Sep 16
2010 Oct 09
2010 Oct 10
2010 Oct 11
2010 Oct 12
2010 Oct 13
2010 Nov 22
2010 Nov 23
2010 Nov 24
2011 Jul 10
2011 Jul 13
2011 Aug 19
2011 Aug 20
2012 Dec 10

2010 Sep 15
2010 Sep 16
2010 Oct 09c d
2010 Oct 10c d
2010 Oct 11d
2010 Oct 13c d
2010 Nov 22d
2010 Nov 23d
2010 Nov 24d
2011 Jul 10c
2011 Aug 19
2011 Aug 20c

2010 Sep 15
2010 Sep 16
2010 Oct 09
2010 Oct 10
2010 Oct 11
2010 Oct 13
2010 Nov 22
2010 Nov 23
2010 Nov 24
2011 Jul 09
2011 Jul 10
2011 Jul 12
2011 Jul 16
2011 Aug 18
2011 Aug 19
2011 Aug 20
2012 Aug 22

38
73
67
32
59
52
65
64
59
49
16
35
43
40

133
39
46
42
14
33
114
190
104
74
136
20

42
45
42
37
37
32
36
38
40
32
30
27
31
54
60
42
50

GJ 15 A
49
78
71
39
64
61
75
66
61
51
31
41
54
52
SV Peg
494
299
108
106
77
263
258
216
153
142
182
192
GJ 876
70
54
58
42
44
37
53
40
43
36
36
36
39
64
65
60
81

45
74
69
36
63
55
68
65
60
50
19
37
51
47

316
235
86
77
27
75
175
202
122
115
162
56

58
52
56
39
42
34
52
40
41
33
36
33
32
58
61
51
80

77
150
138
89
152
166
171
130
121
122
125
120
124
93

2969
2047
1854
1162
356
1111
1085
1395
909
1805
522
1526

100
101
91
97
101
108
142
104
116
94
97
138
114
118
108
126
124

3
4
4
6
6
9
6
4
4
6
30
10
6
4

83
78
480
220
67
112
36
47
55
246
10
602

3
4
3
6
6
10
8
7
8
8
8
18
12
4
3
6
3

– 60 –

Table 2—Continued

Night Min. SNRb Max. SNRb Med. SNRb Total SNRb Nobs

aTaken from the survey conducted by Gagn´e et al. (submitted to ApJ)

bAll SNR values are per pixel

cNights used for intra-night RV stability test

dNights used for intra-run RV stability test

– 61 –

Table 3. Parameters of the Nominal RV Pipeline Spectral Model

Parameter

Description

Symbol

Bounded/Variable/Fixed

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Standard Deviation of Gaussian Term
Amplitude of Degree 1 Hermite Polynomiala
Amplitude of Degree 2 Hermite Polynomial
Amplitude of Degree 3 Hermite Polynomial
Amplitude of Degree 4 Hermite Polynomial
Coeﬃcient of 0th Order Term in Blaze Function
Coeﬃcient of 1st Order Term in Blaze Function
Coeﬃcient of 2nd Order Term in Blaze Function
Stellar Doppler Shiftb
Gas Cell Doppler Shift
Telluric Doppler Shift
Gas Cell Optical Depthc
Telluric Spectra Optical Depthc
Fringing Correction Amplituded
Fringing Correction Periodd
Fringing Correction Phased
Linear Correction to Wavelength Solutione
Quadratic Correction to Wavelength Solutione

ω
a1
a2
a3
a4
b0
b1
b2
∆ln λ
∆λg
∆λt
τg
τt
A
B
C
α
β

Bounded (0.625 to 1.25 Pixels)
Bounded (−0.1 to 0.1)
Bounded (−0.1 to 0.1)
Bounded (−0.1 to 0.1)
Bounded (−0.1 to 0.1)
Bounded (0.5 to 2)
Bounded (−0.01 to 0.01)
Bounded (−0.0001 to 0.0001)
Variable
Variable
Bounded (−2 to 2 ˚A)
Fixed (Value = 0.97)
Bounded (0.4 to 1.5)
Bounded (0.001 to 0.05)
Bounded (4 to 8 ˚A)
Variable
Bounded (−1 to 1 Pixels−1)
Bounded (−1 to 1 Pixels−2)

aAll amplitudes are relative to 1, the amplitude of the 0th degree Hermite Polynomial.

bThe RVs are calculated by multiplying this parameter by the speed of light.

cThe optical depth is scaled such that a value of 1 returns the original input spectra.

dSee Eq. 11.

eSee Eq. 12.

– 62 –

Table 4. Nightly Barycenter-Corrected RVs for GJ 15 A , GJ 876, and SV Peg

JD–2455455b

RVa
(m s−1)

Uncertainty

(m s−1)

0.834140
23.960559
24.986080
25.869275
26.967954
27.866246
67.907675
68.825930
69.838525
298.040009
301.147817
339.045267
339.976246
818.876855

-0.043630
0.959465
23.801641
24.902778
25.851236
27.829183
67.834274
68.814017
69.829224
298.046772
338.941645
339.879140

-0.017098
0.995238
23.861299
24.927684
25.821908
27.815938
67.728300
68.798500
69.778698
297.134482
298.073901
300.122728
304.006015
337.950553
338.956779
339.935483

GJ 15 A
-35.924
-16.589
12.105
-19.026
-24.966
-15.098
4.806
-25.036
15.173
-47.045
90.232
21.583
-0.465
40.248

SV Peg
-1020.564
-971.478
-271.968
-238.170
-154.422
-139.810
1716.403
1718.879
1808.495
-578.908
-900.155
-968.302
GJ 876
-274.078
-247.526
180.486
137.066
162.014
154.259
29.125
79.733
130.209
-244.962
-577.572
-382.672
-367.829
130.333
149.520
157.981

58.905
17.128
8.653
32.705
10.128
19.197
14.626
10.005
17.589
44.270
25.418
27.680
16.231
17.535

5.260
4.066
3.071
4.333
11.137
5.050
7.937
7.166
7.207
4.842
16.988
3.300

9.861
20.746
45.491
16.330
34.660
29.013
11.420
13.565
13.523
21.565
58.904
24.414
22.797
13.222
2.586
28.302

– 63 –

Table 4—Continued

RVa
JD–2455455b (m s−1)

Uncertainty

(m s−1)

706.966665

172.149

19.817

aWith mean RV value subtracted

bMedian of JDs of individual spectra in

the given night

– 64 –

Table 5.

Intra-Run Nightly Barycenter-Corrected RVs for SV Peg with Linear Trend Subtracted

JD–2455455a

RV

(m s−1)

Uncertainty

(m s−1)

23.801641
24.902778
25.851236
27.829183

67.834274
68.814017
69.829224

Oct 2010
1.518
-4.729
2.667
2.362
Nov 2010
2.988
-2.064
0.704

1.155
1.705
5.467
2.432

4.064
2.410
2.008

aMedian of JDs of individual spectra in

the given night

