UTTG-01-16

What Happens in a Measurement?

Steven Weinberg∗

Theory Group, Department of Physics, University of Texas

Austin, TX, 78712

Abstract

It is assumed that in a measurement the system under study interacts with a
macroscopic measuring apparatus, in such a way that the density matrix of
the measured system evolves according to the Lindblad equation. Under an
assumption of non-decreasing von Neumann entropy, conditions on the op-
erators appearing in this equation are given that are necessary and suﬃcient
for the late-time limit of the density matrix to take the form appropriate for
a measurement. Where these conditions are satisﬁed, the Lindblad equa-
tion can be solved explicitly. The probabilities appearing in the late-time
limit of this general solution are found to agree with the Born rule, and are
independent of the details of the operators in the Lindblad equation.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
8
0
0
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: weinberg@physics.utexas.edu

1

I. INTRODUCTION

According to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, dur-
ing a complete measurement the initial density matrix ρinitial undergoes a
collapse

ρinitial 7→ ρﬁnal = Xα

pαΛα

(1)

where Λα = |αihα| are projection operators onto the complete set of or-
thonormal eigenvectors |αi of whatever is being measured, satisfying the
usual conditions

ΛαΛβ = δαβΛα Xα

Λα = 1

TrΛα = 1

Λ†

α = Λα ,

(2)

and pα are probabilities, given by the Born rule

pα = hα|ρinitial|αi = Tr(cid:16)Λαρinitial(cid:17) .

(3)

In a closed system in ordinary quantum mechanics the state vector evolves
unitarily and deterministically, so as well known the collapse (1) cannot oc-
cur if the initial density matrix ρinitial describes a pure state (or an ensemble
of fewer pure states than the number of terms in ρﬁnal). In the original for-
mulation[1] of the Copenhagen interpretation it was simply accepted that
the change in a system during measurement in principle departs from quan-
tum mechanics. We will instead adopt the popular modern view that the
Copenhagen interpretation refers to open systems in which the transition
(1) is driven by the interaction of the microscopic system under study with
a suitable environment, a macroscopic external measuring apparatus (which
may include an observer) chosen to bring this transition about.

Of course, this view of the Copenhagen interpretation just pushes the
hard problems of interpreting quantum mechanics to a larger scale. We make
no attempt to address these problems in the present paper, beyond noting
the conjecture[2] that the unitary evolution of microscopic systems is merely
a very good approximation, while the density matrix of combined systems
with macroscopic parts in general evolves rapidly and non-unitarily, and
in particular undergoes the collapse (1) during a measurement. Although
in this paper we are focusing on ordinary quantum mechanics in an open
system, most of our analysis applies equally to closed systems in modiﬁed
versions of quantum mechanics.

Whether in open systems in ordinary quantum mechanics or in closed
systems in some modiﬁed version of quantum mechanics, in order to avoid

2

instantaneous communication at a distance in entangled states, it is impor-
tant to require that the density matrix at one time depends on the density
matrix at any earlier time, but not otherwise on the state vector at the earlier
time.[3]. This evolution can be linear but non-unitary in ordinary quantum
mechanics if the system under study interacts with an environment that
ﬂuctuates randomly more rapidly than the rate at which the density matrix
evolves (set by the interaction strength) if we average over these ﬂuctua-
tions. We do not need to go into details regarding this interaction with the
environment, because it is known that in the most general linear evolution
that preserves the unit trace and Hermiticity of the density matrix and sat-
isﬁes the condition of complete positivity[4], the density matrix satisﬁes the
Lindblad equation[5]:

dρ(t)

dt

= −ihH, ρ(t)i +Xn (cid:18)Lnρ(t)L†

n −

1
2

L†

nLnρ(t) −

1
2

ρ(t)L†

nLn(cid:19) ,

(4)

with constant matrices∗∗ Ln and H. We then face three questions:

1. What are the necessary conditions on the operators Ln and H for
the density matrix to approach a time-independent linear combination
such as (1) of speciﬁc projection operators Λα at late times?

2. Are these conditions suﬃcient?

3. For such Ln and H, are the coeﬃcients pα of the Λα in this linear

combination given by the Born rule (3)?

The answer to the ﬁrst question is given in Section II, under the assumption
that the Ln satisfy the necessary and suﬃcient condition[6] that the von
Neumann entropy −Tr(ρ ln ρ) should never decrease:

Xn

L†

nLn = Xn

LnL†

n .

(5)

The second and third questions are answered in Section III, where we give
a general solution of the Lindblad equation, under the conditions found in
Section II.

II. NECESSARY CONDITIONS FOR A MEASUREMENT

∗∗We limit the considerations of this paper to a Hilbert space of a ﬁnite dimensionality
d. Presumably they can be extended to inﬁnite dimensional spaces, on which H and the
Ln act as suitably deﬁned operators.

3

First, let us consider some general aspects of the late-time behavior of
the solutions of the Lindblad equation (4), without yet specializing to Ln
satisfying Eq. (5). Because Eq. (4) is linear with time-independent coeﬃ-
cients, it has solutions that are generically of the form

ρ(t) = Xk

vk exp(cid:16)λkt(cid:17) ,

(6)

where vk and λk are the eigenmatrices and eigenvalues of the operator L in
Eq. (4):

L†

nLn v −

(7)

(8)

1
2

v L†

nLn(cid:19) ,

Lv ≡ −ihH, vi +Xn (cid:18)Ln v L†

Lvk = λkvk ,
1
2

n −

with the normalization of each vk in Eq. (6) of course depending on initial
conditions. (It is only for the non-degenerate case that the solution of Eq. (4)
necessarily takes the form (6); if an eigenvalue λk has an N -fold degeneracy,
then exp(λkt) may be accompanied with a polynomial in t of order up to
N − 1.) Because L is in general not Hermitian the eigenvalues may be
complex, and the individual vk need not be Hermitian or positive, though
the sum (6) must be both Hermitian and positive,

Even if there are eigenvalues λk with positive-deﬁnite real parts, such
terms cannot contribute to the sum (6). If they did contribute then the sum
of such terms would dominate ρ(t) at late times. But Trρ(t) must remain
constant, so the sum of terms with Reλk > 0 would have to be traceless.
Also, ρ(t) must remain Hermitian and positive, so the sum of terms with
Reλk > 0 would have to be Hermitian and positive. But then the eigenvalues
of this sum would have to be real and positive and add up to zero, which is
impossible unless all the eigenvalues vanish, in which case the sum vanishes.
The same argument rules out any contribution of powers of time for any
eigenvalues with Reλk = 0. So we conclude that the asymptotic behavior
of ρ(t) is dominated by the sum of vk exp(λkt) over all eigenmatrices with
Reλk = 0, if there are any.

In fact, as required by the constancy of the trace, there always is at least
one eigenmatrix with λk = 0. We can think of L as a d2 × d2 matrix, acting
on the space of d × d matrices. Because Eq. (4) preserves the trace of ρ,
the unit d × d matrix 1 is a left eigenvector of L with eigenvalue zero, so
DetL = 0, and therefore L also has a right eigenvector (not necessarily the
unit matrix) with eigenvalue zero. But in general there may be several vk
with λk = 0.

4

In order to separate the real and imaginary parts of general eigenvalues,

let us consider the quantity

Tr(cid:16)v†

kvk(cid:17) λk = Tr(cid:16)v†

kLvk(cid:17) .

A straightforward calculation gives

Tr(cid:16)v†

Tr(cid:16)v†

−

1
2

kvk(cid:17)Reλk = −
Tr vkv†

Tr Xn
kXn (cid:16)L†
kvk(cid:17)Imλk = −Tr(cid:16)v†

1
2

nLn − LnL†

n(cid:17)!

[vk , L†

n]†[vk , L†

n]!

k[H, vk](cid:17) + ImTrXn

Lnv†

k[vk, L†
n]

(9)

(10)

(11)

(See Appendix A.) It is diﬃcult to make further progress without invoking
some assumption that limits the nature of the Ln. As mentioned in Sec. I,
we shall assume that the Ln satisfy the necessary and suﬃcient condition
(5) for non-decreasing entropy. In this case, Eq. (10) simpliﬁes to

Tr(cid:16)v†

kvk(cid:17)Reλk = −

1
2

Tr Xn

[vk , L†

n]†[vk , L†

n]! .

(12)

We see immediately that the real parts of all λk are negative or zero. The
behavior of ρ(t) for t → ∞ is then dominated by the modes vk for which
Reλk = 0, for which according to Eq. (12) vk must commute with all L†
n,
and hence with all Ln. (By taking the adjoint of Eq. (7) we see that if vk is
an eigenmatrix of L then so is v†
k, which must appear in (6) along with vk
to keep ρ Hermitian. The adjoint of the condition that v†
k commutes with
L†

n tells us that vk must commute with Ln.)

Also, for such modes Eq. (11) gives

Tr(cid:16)v†

kvk(cid:17)Imλk = −Tr(cid:16)v†

k[H, vk](cid:17) .

(13)

But it must not be thought that a vk that commutes with all Ln is nec-
essarily an eigenmatrix of L with the real part of the eigenvalue zero and
its imaginary part of ﬁrst order in H. With Ln subject to Eq. (5) and vk
commuting with all Ln, the eigenvalue equation (7) becomes

λkvk = −i[H, vk] ,

5

but this is impossible if the space of matrices that commute with all Ln is
not invariant under commutation with H. Otherwise the commutator with
H in Eq. (7) will mix the eigenmatrices vk that commute with all Ln with
other matrices that do not commute with some Ln, giving an eigenvalue
with negative-deﬁnite real part, whose contribution vanishes for t → ∞.

Here is an example. Take d = 2, with a single Ln given by L = ℓσ3 (which
trivially satisﬁes Eq. (5)), and H = hσ1, with h real. This L commutes with
the projection operators (1 ± σ3)/2, as required in a measurement of σ3,
but for h 6= 0 the commutator of H with these projection operators does
not commute with them, so the measurment doesn’t work. We can see
this in the late-time behavior of the solutions of the Lindblad equation. In
general the eigenmatrices of L are v0 ∝ 1, with eigenvalue zero; v1 ∝ σ1,
with eigenvalue −2|ℓ|2 < 0; and two mixtures of σ2 and σ3, with eigenvalues
−|ℓ|2 ± (|ℓ|4 − 4h2)1/2. For h = 0 there are two eigenmatrices with eigenvalue
zero, which can be taken as 1 and σ3, or equivalently as the projection
matrices (1 + σ3)/2 and (1 − σ3)/2 as needed in a measurement of σ3; the
other eigenmatrices both have eigenvalues −2|ℓ|2, corresponding to modes
that disappear for t → ∞. On the other hand the late-time behavior of
the density matrix is entirely diﬀerent if h is non-zero, though arbitrarily
small. In this case all eigenvalues have negative-deﬁnite real part, except the
eigenvalue λ0 = 0 associated with v0 ∝ 1, and for t → ∞ the density matrix
approaches the maximum entropy matrix 1/2, for which all probabilities are
the same.

With this background, let us now consider what happens in a measure-
ment. We suppose that the microscopic system under study interacts with
a macroscopic measuring apparatus, in such a way that the density matrix
of the microscopic system evolves according to the Lindblad equation (4),
with the measuring apparatus chosen so that the matrices Ln and H have
whatever properties are needed so that ρ(t) at late times approaches a linear
combination of projection operators Λα on the eigenstates |αi of whatever
is being measured. As we have seen in Eq. (12), in order for this to be the
case without putting any constraints on the initial conditions that determine
the coeﬃcients in this linear combination, it is necessary that the matrices
Ln should commute with any linear combination of the Λα, and hence with
each Λα:

[Ln, Λα] = 0 ,

(14)

from which it follows immediately that each Ln must itself be a linear com-

6

bination of the Λα:

Ln = Xα

ℓnαΛα ,

(15)

with coeﬃcients ℓnα that are in general complex numbers. (From Eq. (14) it
follows that the eigenstates |αi satisfying Λβ|αi = δαβ|αi must be eigenstates
of the Ln:

Ln|αi = LnΛα|αi = ΛαLn|αi = |αihα|Ln|αi

Then Ln has the same action on any |αi as does the sum (15) with ℓnα =
hα|Ln|αi, and since the |αi form a complete set, Ln must equal the sum
(15).) From Eq. (15) the condition (5) for non-decreasing entropy follows
trivially.

This leaves us with the matrix H. As remarked earlier, in order that the
limiting behavior of ρ(t) for general initial conditions should be a linear com-
bination of the Λα, it is necessary that the space of such linear combinations
should be invariant under commutation with H:

[H, Λα] = Xβ

hαβΛβ .

By multiplying this commutator on both the left and right with any Λβ,
we see that 0 = hαβ, and therefore H must commute with all Λα. By the
same argument used above for the Ln, we see then that H must be a linear
combination of the Λα:

hαΛα ,

(16)

H = Xα

with real coeﬃcients hα.

This is a good place to bring up a complication. The late-time behavior
(1) is expected only for a complete measurement. It is more common for
measurements to be incomplete, in the sense that they do not lead to deﬁnite
states |αi with deﬁnite probabilities, but to equivalence classes of states
that are not distinguished by the measurement. For instance, in a system
consisting of two spins 1/2, we might measure only the ﬁrst spin, leaving the
other undisturbed. The states then fall into two classes, labeled by the z-
components of the two spins: one class consists of |1/2, 1/2i and |1/2, −1/2i,
and the other consists of | − 1/2, 1/2i and | − 1/2, −1/2i.
In incomplete
measurements, instead of (1), the expected late-time limit of the density
matrix is

ΛC ρinitialΛC ,

(17)

ρinitial 7→ ρﬁnal = XC

7

where

ΛC = Xα∈C

Λα ,

(18)

As far as the states within a single class are concerned, ΛC acts just like a
unit matrix, so Eq, (17) says that the measurement does nothing to what is
not being measured. For a complete measurement, where each state belongs
to a diﬀerent class, Eq. (17) reduces to Eqs. (1) and (3).

Eq. (12) shows that in order for ρ(t) to have some given asymptotic limit
ρﬁnal, it is necessary for all Ln to commute with this limit, and since this
must be true for all ρinitial, the Ln here must in particular commute with

PC ΛC ΛαΛC = Λα. The same argument as given above for complete mea-

surements then shows that, here too, eash Ln must be a linear combination
(15) of the Λα. Only now there is a constraint on the coeﬃcients. The
commutator of the sum (15) with the limit (17) is

hXα

ℓnαΛα , XC

ΛCρinitialΛCi = XC Xβ,γ∈C

[ℓnβ − ℓnγ]ΛβρinitialΛγ

which vanishes for all initial density matrices if ℓnβ = ℓnγ for all β and γ in
the same class. The same argument shows that hβ = hγ if β and γ are in
the same class. This is reasonable, because for an incomplete measurement
the Lindblad equation must not distinguish between diﬀerent states in the
same class, We will see in the next section that in this case the late-time
limit of the density matrix does have the form (17).

III. COLLAPSE OF THE DENSITY MATRIX

First let us give the solution of the Lindblad equation under the condition
that the matrices Ln and H in this equation are linear combinations (15),
(16) of projection operators Λα satisfying Eq. (2):

Ln = Xα

ℓnαΛα ,

hαΛα .

H = Xα

It is straightforward to check that Eq. (4) is then satisﬁed by

ρ(t) = Xαβ

ΛαM Λβ exp(λαβt) ,

where

λαβ = −

1

2

2 Xn (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

ℓnα − ℓnβ(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+ i ImXn

ℓnαℓ∗

nβ − i(cid:16)hα − hβ(cid:17) .

8

(19)

(20)

and M is an arbitrary matrix, independent of α, β, and time. [See Appendix
B.] To relate M to the initial value of ρ(t) at t = 0, set t = 0 in Eq. (19) and

use the completeness condition Pα Λα = 1. We see that ρ(0) = M , and so

ρ(t) = Xαβ

Λαρ(0)Λβ exp(λαβt) ,

(21)

This is our general solution.[7]

Now consider the behavior of this solution at late times. The only terms
in the sum (21) that do not decay exponentially are those with ℓnα = ℓnβ
for all n. If for the moment we rule out degeneracy, so that ℓnα can equal
ℓnβ for all n only for α = β, then all λαβ have negative-deﬁnite real part
except those with α = β, for which the imaginary as well as the real parts of
λαα vanish. These terms then dominate the asymptotic behavior[8] of the
density matrix for t → ∞:

ρ(t) → Xα

Λαρ(0)Λα = Xα

Λαhα|ρ(0)|αi

(22)

This is just the behavior (1) called for by the Copenhagen interpretation,
with probabilities pα given by the Born rule (3).

The case of degeneracy arises in an incomplete measurement, in which
we only measure whether the system is in some state or other in a class of
states that are not distinguished by the measurement. As indicated at the
end of the previous section, in this case we expect ℓnα to equal ℓnβ for all n
and hβ = hγ if (and only if) |αi and |βi are in the same class. Then Eq. (21)
has the expected late-time behavior (17).

It is striking that although the detailed time-dependence of the density
matrix depends on the coeﬃcients ℓnα and hα appearing in the matrices in
the Lindblad equation, the asymptotic limit for t → ∞ for both complete
and incomplete measurements does not depend on these details, depending
only on the initial condition ρ(0) and on what it is that is being measured.
This, of course, is just what we require of a measurement.

Acknowledgments

I am grateful for correspondence with P. Pearle, and regarding the condi-
tion for non-decreasing entropy, with H. Narnhofer, D. Reeb, and R. Werner.

9

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Founda-
tion under Grant Number PHY-1316033 and with support from The Robert
A. Welch Foundation, Grant No. F-0014.

APPENDIX A: Derivation of Eqs. (10) and (11)

We start with the desired result, and work back to the problem it solves.

For a general matrix v, consider the quantity

R ≡ −

1
2

Tr Xn

+iImTrXn

[v , L†

n]†[v , L†

n]! −

1
2

Tr vv†Xn (cid:16)L†

nLn − LnL†

n(cid:17)!

(A.1)

Lnv†[v, L†

n] − iTr(cid:16)v†[H, v](cid:17)

Expanding each term, this is

R = −

Lnv†v L†

n +

1
2

TrXn

−

+

1
2
1
2

TrXn
TrXn

vv†L†

nLn +

v†LnvL†

n −

1
2
1
2

−iTr(cid:16)v†[H, v](cid:17) .

1
2

TrXn

v†Lnv L†

n +

1
2

TrXn

Lnv†L†

n v −

1
2

TrXn

v†Ln L†

n v

vv†LnL†
n

Lnv†L†

nv

TrXn
TrXn

(A.2)

The third and eighth terms cancel; the fourth and sixth terms cancel; the sec-
n in Trv†Lv; the

in Trv†Lv; and the last term gives the Hamiltonian term in Trv†Lv. We con-
clude that

ond and seventh terms add to give the term Trv†Pn LnvL†
ﬁrst and ﬁfth terms give the terms −Trv†vPn L†
R = Tr(cid:16)v†Lv(cid:17) .
n]! −

ReTr v†Lv = −

1
2

[v , L†

n]†[v , L†

1
2

The ﬁrst two terms in (A.1) are real, while the last two are imaginary, so

nLn − LnL†

nLn/2 and −Trv†Pn L†

nLnv/2

(A.3)

Tr Xn

Tr vv†Xn (cid:16)L†
n] − Tr(cid:16)v†[H, v](cid:17)

n(cid:17)!

(A.4)
(A.5)

Im Tr v†Lv = ImTrXn

Lnv†[v, L†

Taking v to be one of the eigenmatrices vk of L, with Lvk = λkvk then gives
Eqs. (10) and (11).

10

APPENDIX B: Derivation of Eqs. (19) and (20)

We try a solution of the Lindblad equation

ρ(t) = Xαβ

ΛαM Λβfαβ(t) .

(B.1)

With Λα and H given by Eqs. (15) and (16), the Lindblad equation (4)
becomes

ΛαM Λβ

‘Xαβ

fαβ(t) = Xαβ

λαβΛαM Λβfαβ(t) ,

(B.2)

d
dt

‘ where

and

λαβ = Cαβ −

1
2

Cαα −

1
2

Cββ − i(hα − hβ)

Cαβ = Xn

ℓnαℓ∗

nβ .

This has an obvious solution of the same form as (19):

fαβ(t) = exp(cid:16)λαβt(cid:17)fαβ(0) .

To get a more useful expression for λαβ, we note that

(B.3)

(B.4)

(B.5)

−

1
2

|ℓα − ℓβ|2 = −

1
2

Cαα−

1
2

Cββ+ReXn

so Eq. (B.3) is the same as Eq. (20).

ℓnαℓ∗

nβ = Cαβ−

1
2

Cαα−

1
2

Cββ−iImXn

ℓnαℓ∗
nβ

———

1. N. Bohr, Nature 121, 580 (1928).

2. G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and T. Weber, Phys. Rev. D 34, 470
(1986); P. Pearle, Phys. Rev. A 39, 2277 (1989), and in Quan-
tum Theory: A Two-Time Success Story (Yakir Aharonov Festschrift),
eds. D. C. Struppa & J. M. Tollakson (Springer, 2013), Chapter 9.
[arXiv:1209.5082]

11

3. N. Gisin, Helv. Phys. Acta 62, 363 (1989); Phys. Lett. A 143, 1
(1990). This is discussed in a wider context by J. Polchinski, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 66, 397 (1991).

4. If any entangled density matrix for a compound system S ⊗ S consist-
ing of two isolated copies of a system S remains positive for a range
of future times if it is positive at an initial time, then the linear map-
ping ρ(t) → ρ(t′) of the density matrix of S for t′ > t in this range
is completely positive, as shown by F. Benatti, R. Floreanini, and R.
Romano, J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 35, L551 (2002). For complete pos-
itivity see W. F. Stinnespring, Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 6, 211 (1955);
M. D. Choi, J. Canada Math. 24, 520 (1972). For its implications,
see M. D. Choi, Linear Algebra and its Applications 10, 285 (1975).

5. G. Lindblad, Commun. Math. Phys. 48, 119 (1976); V. Gorini, A.
Kossakowski and E. C. G. Sudarshan, J. Math. Phys. 17, 821 (1976).
For a straightforward derivation, see P. Pearle, Eur. J. Phys. 33, 805
(2012).

6. F. Benatti and R. Narnhofer, Lett. Math. Phys. 15, 325 (1988).
(Their result, which applies for inﬁnite as well as ﬁnite Hilbert spaces,
takes the form of an inequality. When limited to ﬁnite Hilbert spaces,
it iw equivalent to the equality (5).) It was earlier shown by T. Banks,
M. Peskin, and L. Susskind, Nuclear Phys. B 244, 125 (1984), that a
suﬃcient (though not necessary) condition for non-decreasing entropy
is that the Ln are Hermitian. Of course, if the Ln are Hermitian then
Eq. (5) is automatically satisﬁed.

7. This solution was given in the second edition of S. Weinberg, Lectures
on Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
2015), Section 6.9, for the special case where all Ln are Hermitian.

8. This behavior is seen in several of the examples presented by Pearle

in ref. [5].

12

