Draft v6.4
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

PHOTO-REVERBERATION MAPPING OF A PROTOPLANETARY ACCRETION DISK

AROUND A T TAURI STAR

Huan Y. A. Meng1,2,3, Peter Plavchan1,4, George H. Rieke2,3, Ann Marie Cody5, Tina G¨uth6, John Stauffer7,

Kevin Covey8, Sean Carey7, David Ciardi1, Maria C. Duran-Rojas9, Robert A. Gutermuth10, Mar´ıa

Morales-Calder´on11, Luisa M. Rebull7, Alan M. Watson12

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
0
0
0
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Draft v6.4

ABSTRACT

Theoretical models and spectroscopic observations of newborn stars suggest that protoplantary disks
have an inner “wall” at a distance set by the disk interaction with the star. Around T Tauri stars,
the size of this disk hole is expected to be on a 0.1-AU scale that is unresolved by current adaptive
optics imaging, though some model-dependent constraints have been obtained by near-infrared inter-
ferometry. Here we report the ﬁrst measurement of the inner disk wall around a solar-mass young
stellar object, YLW 16B in the ρ Ophiuchi star-forming region, by detecting the light travel time of
the variable radiation from the stellar surface to the disk. Consistent time lags were detected on two
nights, when the time series in H (1.6 µm) and K (2.2 µm) bands were synchronized while the 4.5
µm emission lagged by 74.5 ± 3.2 seconds. Considering the nearly edge-on geometry of the disk, the
inner rim should be 0.084 AU from the protostar on average, with an error of order 0.01 AU. This
size is likely larger than the range of magnetospheric truncations, and consistent with an optically
and geometrically thick disk front at the dust sublimation radius at ∼1500 K. The widths of the
cross-correlation functions between the data in diﬀerent wavebands place possible new constraints on
the geometry of the disk.
Subject headings: accretion, accretion disks — circumstellar matter — protoplanetary disks — stars:

individual (YLW 16B) — stars: variables: T Tauri

1.

INTRODUCTION

Stars form by fragmentation and gravitational collapse
within giant molecular clouds (Dunham et al. 2014). Due
to the conservation of angular momentum, in the ﬁrst few
million years after star formation, most young stellar ob-
jects (YSOs) still host accreting protoplanetary disks of

hyameng@lpl.arizona.edu

1 Infrared Processing and Analysis Center, California Insti-
tute of Technology, MC 100-22, 770 S Wilson Ave, Pasadena,
CA 91125

2 Lunar and Planetary Laboratory and Department of Plan-
etary Sciences, University of Arizona, 1629 E University Blvd,
Tucson, AZ 85721

3 Steward Observatory and Department of Astronomy, Uni-

versity of Arizona, 933 N Cherry Ave, Tucson, AZ 85721

4 Department of Physics, Astronomy and Materials Science,
Missouri State University, 901 S National Ave, Springﬁeld, MO
65897

5 NASA Ames Research Center, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035
6 Department of Physics, New Mexico Institute of Mining and

Technology, 801 Leroy Pl, Socorro, NM 87801

7 Infrared Science Archive and Spitzer Science Center, Infrared
Processing and Analysis Center, California Institute of Technol-
ogy, MC 314-6, 1200 E California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125

8 Department of Physics and Astronomy, MS-9164, Western

Washington University, 516 High St, Bellingham, WA 98225

9 Instituto de Astronom´ıa, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma
de M´exico, Apartado Postal 106, 22800, Ensenada, Baja Cali-
fornia, M´exico

10 Department of Astronomy, University of Massachusetts,

Amherst, MA 01003

11 Centro de Astrobiolog´ıa, Departamento de Astrof´ısica,
INTA-CSIC, PO Box 78, E-28691, ESAC Campus, Villanueva
de la Ca˜nada, Madrid, Spain

12 Instituto de Astronom´ıa, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma
de M´exico, Apartado Postal 70-264, 04510 M´exico, D. F., M´exico

relatively primordial gas and dust, which are later dis-
persed to give birth to planets (Williams & Cieza 2011).
The structure of the inner region of a protoplanetary
disk depends on the mechanism by which the disk mass
accretes onto the central star. One of the crucial di-
agnostics for various models is where the inner disk is
truncated. The inner boundary of a protoplanetary ac-
cretion disk is expected to be shaped by sublimation
(for dust, Monnier & Millan-Gabet 2002; Muzerolle et
al. 2003) and/or stellar magnetospheres (for gas, K¨onigl
1991), forming an optically thick inner disk “wall”.

The current paradigm of the inner disk structure
is largely constrained by near-infrared interferometry
(Millan-Gabet et al. 2007; Dullemond & Monnier 2010;
Anthonioz et al. 2015), from which the measurements of
the inner disk rims are to some extent model-dependent
(e.g., Akeson et al. 2005). This works well for larger disk
holes around higher mass Herbig Be and Ae stars. How-
ever, the inner disk holes of solar-mass T Tauri stars are
expected to be on the order of 0.1 AU. This is too small to
be directly resolved by current adaptive optics imaging,
while it also makes the interpretation of interferometric
observations sensitive to model assumptions, leading to
controversial results (cf. Eisner et al. 2007; Pinte et al.
2008).

For new insights to the disk structure, we have probed
the inner disk region in a relatively model-independent
way, by measuring the light travel time from the proto-
star to the inner wall of its disk (Harries 2011; Plavchan
et al. 2016). We introduce the observations and data
reduction procedures in §2, analyze the observational re-
sults in §3, and ﬁnally discuss the accretion mechanism
and other constraints in §4. A summary is given in §5.

2

Meng et al. 2016

2. OBSERVATIONS AND DATA REDUCTION

We selected L1688 (a part of the ρ Ophiuchi star-
forming region at ∼120 pc, Wilking et al. 2008) as the
target of this experiment, because of its proximity and
high concentration of variable YSOs in the 2MASS cali-
bration ﬁeld observations (Plavchan et al. 2008; Parks
et al. 2014).
Ideally, we should monitor the stellar
variations at visible wavelengths. However, the L1688
ﬁeld is behind an interstellar cloud with high extinction
(AV ∼ 30, Evans et al. 2003). The shortest wavelength
that can yield suﬃcient signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) while
allowing high exposure cadence is H band in the near
infrared. Therefore, we used the near-infrared H and K
bands with 4 ground-based telescopes, together with co-
ordinated Spitzer Space Telescope observations to moni-
tor the YSOs.

2.1. Spitzer and Ground-based Observations

The Spitzer observations were made in its warm mis-
sion with the Infrared Array Camera (IRAC, Fazio et al.
2004) under program 60109 for three periods of staring
mode observations at 4.5 µm, on April 20, 22, and 24,
2010, respectively. Each session lasted about 8 hours,
with frame time of 2 seconds and no dithering. We chose
4.5 µm over 3.6 µm with IRAC to maximize the frac-
tional ﬂux contribution from the disk.

Near simultaneous ground-based observations were
made with the FLAMINGOS on the 4-m Mayall tele-
scope at Kitt Peak National Observatory, Arizona; the
Spartan Infrared Camera on the 4-m SOAR telescope
and the ANDICAM on the SMARTS 1.3-m telescope,
both at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, Chile;
and Camila on the Harold L. Johnson 1.5-m telescope of
Observatorio Astron´omico Nacional (OAN) at Sierra San
Pedro M´artir, Mexico. We used the larger telescopes,
Mayall/FLAMINGOS and SOAR/Spartan, in H band
and the smaller telescopes, SMARTS 1.3-m/ANDICAM
and OAN Johnson 1.5-m/Camila, in K band. The time
coverage for each telescope is illustrated in Figure 1. The
ﬁeld of view of each participating telescope, including
Spitzer, is illustrated in Figure 2.

Twenty-seven sources that are in the 2MASS catalog
(Skrutskie et al. 2006) were detected in the Spitzer/IRAC
ﬁeld of view. All these sources were covered by ground-
based observations on at least one night. For all obser-
vations, we relied on the original time in the telescope
systems as recorded in the image headers. To correct the
light travel time among participating telescopes at dif-
ferent locations, including Spitzer, the mid-point of each
exposure is converted to the barycentric modiﬁed Julian
date in dynamical time (BMJD TDB) based on the ce-
lestial coordinates of the ﬁeld.

2.2. Data Reduction

2.2.1. Photometry

The ground-based data were prepared with bias, dark,
and ﬂat ﬁeld corrections, where the ﬂat ﬁelds used were
“super-sky ﬂats” constructed based on the science images
themselves by rejecting stars and extreme pixel values.
Aperture photometry was performed on each of the pro-
cessed science images. To guarantee overlapped coverage
with the Spitzer observations, the ground-based observa-
tions were not always made under photometric weather,

and no absolute calibration was attempted. Instead, we
mutually compared the time series of the instrumental
magnitudes to look for isolated and unsaturated bright
stars in the common ﬁeld of view of all telescopes, and
ﬁnally selected three sources as the reference calibrators
for diﬀerential photometry: YLW 15A, YLW 16A, and
YLW 16C. The selection of the same set of reference
stars for all data sets is important for comparing the light
curves from diﬀerent telescopes at diﬀerent wavelengths.
Since the three stars are similar in brightness in both
H and K bands, we adopted the unweighted average of
their instrumental magnitudes as the calibration refer-
ence for all sources observed, including the three stars
themselves.

For the Spitzer data, we used the automated IDL pack-
age Cluster Grinder (Gutermuth et al. 2009) to perform
aperture photometry. This pipeline was used in other
works of the YSOVAR project (e.g., G¨unther et al. 2014).
However, in contrast to other YSOVAR monitoring, the
Spitzer observations in this work were designed to be
in staring mode for ∼8 hours with no dithering and no
break between consecutive exposures, making it irrele-
vant to combine mosaics and deﬁne epochs. Hence, we
only relied on the photometry on the BCD images to
form the time series and retain the highest possible time
resolution.

A complete data set for the reverberation experiment
is provided in Table 2, with Table 1 as the index of
the stars.
It includes the diﬀerential photometry for
all twenty-seven sources monitored by all participating
ground-based telescopes over all three nights. Accurate
Spitzer photometry for the sources is subject to correc-
tions for saturation and intra-pixel sensitivity variations,
which need to be addressed case by case and is beyond
the scope of the paper. For interested readers, the Spitzer
data are publicly available through NASA/IPAC Infrared
Science Archive under program 60109.

Although some of the sources are known infrared vari-
ables on longer timescales, most of them did not vary
signiﬁcantly or had variations uncorrelated at diﬀerent
wavelengths on a timescale less than 8 hours. Only one
source, the class I (Gutermuth et al. 2009) (or edge-on
class II, van Kempen et al. 2009) member known as YLW
16B (= IRS 46 = ISO-Oph 145 = GY 274 = 2MASS
J16272943-2439161), had signiﬁcant hourly variations in
all three wavebands that appear to be mutually corre-
lated. The rest of the work is focused on this object.

2.2.2. Corrections for IRAC Intra-pixel Sensitivity

Variations

Staring mode IRAC observations are known to be af-
fected by intra-pixel variations in detector response. Sev-
eral approaches have been introduced to correct these ef-
fects, e.g., non-parametric sensitivity mapping (Ballard
et al. 2010), polynomial ﬁtting of stellar centroid (Reach
et al. 2005; Knutson et al. 2008), and power spectrum
minimization (Cody & Hillenbrand 2011), see Spitzer
Science Center (2015). None of the methods are applica-
ble to saturated data, while YLW 16B was saturated on
the BCD images on all three nights of our observations.
To deal with the pixel phase eﬀect and the saturation, we
made photometry with 2 diﬀerent apertures on the BCD
images: a small aperture with a radius of 2.8 pixels, and a
larger aperture of 5.6 pixels. Considering that an overex-

Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

3

posed point spread function (PSF) should ﬁrst saturate
the pixels around the centroid, we subtracted the small
aperture ﬂux from the large counterpart to obtain the
brightness of the annular PSF wing, which is less prone
to saturation and is fainter than the entire stellar ﬂux
by a constant factor only dependent on the instrumental
PSF. Though with reduced S/N, an important beneﬁt
of this method is that the PSF wing contains more pix-
els with more even illumination, and thus is much less
aﬀected by the intra-pixel variations, so we needed to
make no corrections for this eﬀect.

On the ﬁrst night, the opto-center of the YSO coinci-
dentally lay close to and wandered around the corner of
4 adjacent pixels. We found the photometry values oﬀset
and noisier when the PSF centroid was on the northwest
pixel, and chose to reject the corresponding part of the
data. On the second night, the photometry of the PSF
wing worked well for all the data. Unfortunately, on
the third night our approaches for de-trending the pixel
phase eﬀect were not successful, likely due to stronger
saturation and the particular pixel location where the
star fell on this night; we had to discard the 4.5 µm
data. The ﬁnal light curves, after corrections for the
IRAC pixel phase eﬀect were applied, are shown in Fig-
ure 3.

2.3. Cross Correlations

As a general strategy to maximize the time resolution,
the experiment design requested all participating tele-
scopes, including Spitzer, to take new exposures immedi-
ately after the previous image was read out. The resul-
tant mean cadence was 13 seconds for OAN Johnson 1.5-
m/Camila, 17 seconds for SOAR/Spartan, 20 seconds for
Mayall/FLAMINGOS and SMARTS 1.3-m/ANDICAM,
and 3.4 seconds for Spitzer/IRAC. None of the instru-
ments yielded evenly spaced time series, but the varia-
tions of the sampling frequency of each instrument were
small (mostly less than 1 second with occasional omis-
sions of a data point) and appeared to be random. These
should have no eﬀect on our science results.

To preserve all information in the original data, be-
fore computing each cross-correlation function (CCF),
we used the faster of the average cadences in the two
compared time series as the equidistant time step to in-
terpolate both data sets, except for skipping the periods
that one or both time series did not cover. Then, we
computed the CCFs between the time series in H and
K bands and at 4.5 µm. Each CCF within ±170 sec-
onds (time for 100 Spitzer BCD frames) was ﬁtted by a
Gaussian to look for any time lag, and by a quadratic
polynomial for a sanity check. The time lags estimated
this way are expected to be more robust (Zhang & Wu
2006), and do not necessarily coincide with the exact lo-
cation of a local minimum, which is more prone to noise
inﬂuence.

For CCFs involving 4.5 µm data, we achieved the most
accurate time lag measurements on the second night. Be-
cause of the lower variation amplitudes and shorter over-
laps of time coverage, on the ﬁrst night the peaks of the
CCFs were shallower and worse deﬁned, resulting in less
accurate time lag measurements. To validate the reality
of the lag, we performed the following test. At each wave-
length, we ﬁrst ﬁtted the light curve with a cubic spline
function and subtracted it from the data, giving two sig-

nal streams: (1) the ﬁtted variations without noise; and
(2) the time-series photometric noise de-trended for the
source variations. We then added these two signals to-
gether with diﬀerent artiﬁcial phase lags and extracted
the CCFs from the artiﬁcial combined signal. The results
suggested that the detected time lags between each pair
of wavelengths have a 1σ uncertainty of ∼3.9 seconds and
are free from noise aliasing.

We found that the light curves of YLW 16B in H and
K bands were consistently synchronized over all three
nights with an insigniﬁcant average oﬀset of −1.4 ± 2.4
seconds; the 4.5 µm signals lagged behind both H and
K by 74.5 ± 3.2 seconds, accurately measured on the
second night and consistent within 2σ errors with the
less constraining data from the ﬁrst night (Figure 4).

3. VARIABILITY ANALYSIS

The hourly photometric variations seen in YLW 16B
could arise from various components in the system, such
as the protostar itself or zones in the circumstellar disk.
Such variations could be correlated. Increases in the stel-
lar or accretion luminosity should, for example, heat the
disk.

Fortunately, our interpretation of time lags can be sim-
pliﬁed because the intrinsic responses should be quick.
Reﬂection of variations from other structures should be
instantaneous once allowing for light travel time. Ther-
mal variations will also be fast. In the innermost region of
a young accretion disk, dust particles are typically small
(on µm scales, Monnier & Millan-Gabet 2002; McClure
et al. 2013) and have little thermal capacity. Their ther-
mal relaxation time should be well under a second, much
faster than the time resolution we can achieve in real ob-
servations. Therefore, to ﬁrst order we can attribute any
time lag between the spectral bands to light travel time
(although radiative transfer may become important on
longer timescales).

Since the observed lag is expected to be the light travel
time, it is critical to identify the source of the variable
component and the response mechanism at each wave-
length. For this purpose, we looked into two aspects of
YLW 16B: the near-infrared spectrum, and the charac-
teristics of the variations.

3.1. Near-Infrared Spectrum

To verify the detection of the central star and con-
strain its spectral type, we utilized the high-resolution
spectrum taken with Keck/NIRSPEC on May 30, 2000
(R∼18000, Doppmann et al. 2005) to look for stellar ab-
sorption features in H and K bands. Although Dopp-
mann et al. (2005) did not identify photospheric lines in
the NIRSPEC spectra of YLW 16B, after careful inspec-
tion of the data we felt that several such lines might exist.
To test their reality, the spectrum was cross-correlated
with a BT-Settl synthetic model spectrum (Allard et al.
2012) from 1800 to 6000 K in increments of 200 K with
solar metallicity and gravity log g = 4.5. Both observed
and synthetic spectra were normalized. The NIRSPEC
spectrum had higher spectral resolution than the BT-
Settl template, so we boxcar smoothed it over 3 pixels,
which made the data less noisy and with comparable
resolution to the model. We then identiﬁed the stellar
temperature and wavelength shift that yielded the maxi-
mum cross-correlation. As shown in Figure 5, the largest

4

Meng et al. 2016

cross-correlation appears to be at 4200 K in the spectral
order around 2.1 µm. However, a closer inspection found
inconsistency with other wavebands in both temperature
and shift. Combining all three orders, the spectrum sug-
gests the most likely eﬀective temperature of 3600 ± 600
K, corresponding to a spectral type of ∼M2. Adopting a
uniform spectral calibration provides solid identiﬁcations
of the Na I absorption triplet at 2.21 µm, and the Mg I
and Al I absorption lines at 2.09 µm at less signiﬁcance.
We experimented with line depths scaled to values
from 5% to 25% to accommodate a corresponding range
of star-to-disk ﬂux ratios and possible emission ﬁlling-
in of the absorption lines. However, we found that the
cross-correlation produced no useful constraint to the line
depth scale.

As a sanity check, we compared the ﬁndings with the
lower-resolution spectra in H and K bands, observed by
IRTF/SpeX weeks before and after the reverberation ex-
periment on March 27, April 1, April 2, and May 7, 2010
(Faesi et al. 2012). Before cross-correlation, the spectra
observed at all 4 epochs were combined for higher S/N.
The synthetic BT-Settl templates were smoothed to the
SpeX spectral resolution (R∼1200). Both data sets were
normalized. The cross-correlation, as shown in Figure 5,
did not yield any obvious peak. However, the maximum
also occurred at Tef f = 3600 K with consistent wave-
length calibrations for both H and K bands, though at
a weak signiﬁcance (cross-correlation ρ ∼ 0.25).

In addition, the combined SpeX spectrum also reveals
several atomic emission lines that are typical for evapo-
rating disks with disk winds (Figure 6). The most promi-
nent are Br γ of H I at 2.17 µm, the Mg I lines at 1.49
and 1.50 µm, and the Na I lines at 2.21 µm. Interest-
ingly, the 2.21 µm Na I lines were absorption features
in the NIRSPEC spectrum, but intermittently appeared
as emission lines with variable equivalent widths in the
SpeX spectra. This suggests that emission ﬁlling of ab-
sorption lines plays a critical role in the detectability of
some photospheric absorption features. Therefore, the
line depth scale may not be a valid constraint to the
fractional ﬂux contribution in this case. The most reli-
able ﬂux ratios for the star and the disk may have to be
estimated by other means.

3.2. Color-Magnitude Diagram and Variability

Mechanisms

We used a color-magnitude diagram to identify the
mechanisms underlying the observed variations. Because
the primary energy source of the system is the central
protostar and the 4.5 µm photometry is most contami-
nated by the radiation of the disk, we focused on the H
and K data, leaving us K vs H − K as the only option
for a color-magnitude diagram. Because K and H − K
are not independent, errors in K will aﬀect the H − K
color, producing a false negative slope. To reduce this
eﬀect to an insigniﬁcant level while retaining some time
information, we averaged the H and K photometry every
204 seconds. The range is deﬁned as 60 times the fastest
average cadence in the experiment (3.4 seconds). Such
averaged photometry was plotted in the color-magnitude
diagram in Figure 7. The nominal errors were 0.002 mag-
nitude in both K and H − K.

In H and K bands, an important reference is the
2MASS calibration ﬁeld photometry of YLW 16B (Parks

et al. 2014). Over a time span of ∼900 days, we found
that the YSO varied between 9.25 and 11.57 magnitude
in Ks, and between 2.55 and 3.20 in H − Ks. Track-
ing the variations in the color-magnitude diagram of K
vs H − K, we found mixed behaviors of YLW 16B that
can be classiﬁed into three types. The long-term vari-
ations of the YSO form a locus of positive slopes with
moderate scatter over the time span of the 2MASS cal-
ibration ﬁeld observations; the relative color-magnitude
relation between the ﬁrst two nights of our reverberation
observations (for which we have comparable H and K
photometry and good 4.5 µm data) had a negative slope,
also with moderate scatter; ﬁnally, the hourly light curve
for each night appears to have mixed behavior with no
dominant trend.

Such complexity indicates that diﬀerent variability
mechanisms are at work on diﬀerent timescales. We con-
sidered a number of possible variability mechanisms. (1)
Variable extinction. Both interstellar and circumstellar
extinction may vary with time (Carpenter et al. 2001;
Cody et al. 2014). The interstellar extinction law has
been well measured towards the Galactic plane and sev-
eral star-forming regions (Indebetouw et al. 2005; Fla-
herty et al. 2007; Chapman et al. 2009). Thanks to on-
going dust growth, circumstellar dust around YSOs may
have a diﬀerent size distribution and optical properties
from its interstellar counterpart (McClure et al. 2013),
possibly leading to a diﬀerent extinction law. However,
because the Keplerian timescale of the inner disk is or-
ders of magnitude shorter than the time needed for global
disk evolution, circumstellar extinction is expected to
vary quasi-periodically (Hillenbrand et al. 2013; Stauf-
fer et al. 2015). (2) Starspots on the stellar photosphere
(Guenther & Hessman 1993; Nguyen et al. 2009; Pozo
Nu˜nez et al. 2015). Magnetic activity within the YSO
can trigger cool starspots like sunspots, and the accretion
mass ﬂow from the disk through the magnetic ﬁeld lines
may produce accretion “hotspots” (Stauﬀer et al. 2014)
near the magnetic poles on the photosphere of the proto-
star (Hartmann et al. 1994). Variability associated with
starspots should be on the timescale of the rotation pe-
riod of the protostar. Radiation from starspots is usually
considered as blackbody, but with diﬀerent temperatures
from the rest of the photosphere. (3) The accreting gas
along the magnetic ﬁeld lines just above the photosphere
of the protostar. Such material is supposed to be the
precursor of accretion hotspots. Diﬀerences in spectral
properties are that the accreting gas can be optically thin
on its way to the star (free-free emission), and does not
have to occupy or obscure any area of the stellar photo-
sphere because of the edge-on line-of-sight, even if it is
optically thick (free-bound or blackbody-like emission).
(4) Variations of the observable thermally emitting area
of the inner disk wall. The temperature of the inner disk
wall is likely close to the dust sublimation temperature
(Monnier & Millan-Gabet 2002; Muzerolle et al. 2003)
and radiates like a blackbody. The timescale for the in-
ner disk variability should be quasi-Keplerian.

We plotted and compared all the observations and the-
oretical models in the color-magnitude diagram in Fig-
ure 7(A). Each data point from the reverberation obser-
vations, averaged over 204 seconds, is individually plot-
ted. The errors are smaller than the symbol sizes and are
not drawn. Although these observations were not cali-

Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

5

brated to the 2MASS standard, they are self-consistent
and are valid for relative comparisons. The interstellar
extinction vector is labeled with the 2MASS extinction
law (Flaherty et al. 2007). The 2MASS data are divided
into 5 bins of Ks magnitude, from 9.0 to 11.5 with a
bin size of 0.5. The median H − Ks color of each bin
is plotted, with the ﬁrst and third quartiles indicated by
horizontal bars.

The exact placement of the spotless protostar on the
color-magnitude diagram is poorly constrained and sub-
ject to the uncertainties in extinction. In the diagrams,
we place it arbitrarily for easier comparisons. The stellar
photosphere is considered as a 3600 K blackbody. The
solid lines of diﬀerent colors represent the models of the
variability mechanisms considered, as labeled in the leg-
end. The cool and hot starspots are assumed to be 2000
and 8000 K, respectively. Three temperatures for the
optically thick (blackbody-like) accreting gas are plotted,
6000, 10000, and 14000 K. For the cool and hot starspots
and the optically thick accreting gas models, each line is
drawn up to the point when the emitting areas of the
added components are 40% of the area of a hemisphere
of the stellar photosphere, no matter whether the pho-
tosphere is occupied (starspots) or not (accreting gas).
The model line for variable dust emitting area is plotted
to the point at which the disk emitting area is 12 times
larger than a hemisphere of the stellar photosphere.

From Figure 7, it is clear that the overall positive slope
(note the inverted Y-axis) of the long-term variations in
the 2MASS data primarily reﬂects the variations of activ-
ities related to the protostar, like starspots or optically
thick accreting gas, since those are the only models that
have potentially matching positive slopes. The scatter in
2MASS H − Ks is similar in amplitude to the amplitude
of the short-term variations in the reverberation experi-
ment, implying that changes similar to those seen in our
monitoring have occurred frequently in the past.

The negative slope, as seen between the ﬁrst two days
of the reverberation experiment, appears to be caused
by variation in the observable disk emitting area. To
verify this hypothesis, we referred to the time-resolved
information of the IRTF/SpeX spectra at the 4 quasi-
contemporary epochs. In the ﬂux calibrated data, shown
in Figure 8(A) and (B), we noticed that the spectra on
March 27 and May 7 had practically identical ﬂuxes and
spectral slopes in H band, with synthetic photometry
agreeing to within 2%, probably better than the un-
certainties. But the March 27 data were signiﬁcantly
brighter and redder in K, providing the basis to com-
pare two diﬀerent states of the inner disk. We subtracted
the K band spectrum on May 7 from that on March 27,
and de-reddened the diﬀerence with AV = 30. We found
that the diﬀerential spectrum, as shown in Figure 8(C),
does not agree with optically thin free-free emission, but
can be reasonably ﬁtted with a blackbody. (The best-ﬁt
temperature is 1100 K, but this is only a very rough esti-
mate because of the calibration uncertainties and limited
wavelength coverage from which it is derived.) This re-
veals the spectrum “added” to K band on March 27 that
made it brighter and redder than on May 7, and conﬁrms
that a variable disk emitting area is likely responsible for
the negative slope in Figure 7.

After associating the long-term and daily variations
to their respective model components, now we focus on

the hourly variations that led to the detected time lag.
A zoom-in view of the color-magnitude diagram of the
reverberation data is shown in Figure 7(B). Despite a
signiﬁcant day-to-day shift, the intra-day observations
appear to have mixed behavior with no dominant color
trend. The squared linear correlation coeﬃcients are
∼0.001 for the data of both nights.

The evolution between consecutive data points (sep-
arated by 204 seconds) is reversible back and forth in
the diagram. The disk emitting area could not possi-
bly increase and then decrease on such short timescales,
making the model incompatible with the hourly changes.
Variable extinction may play a role over any timescale.
But the ﬁxed extinction vector alone cannot explain the
random directions in the color-magnitude evolution. The
most likely interpretation for the hourly variations is that
they are caused by a changing continuum from the ac-
creting gas (Guenther & Hessman 1993; Stauﬀer et al.
2014). The net eﬀect on the output of the source is a
varying combination of optically thick and optically thin
emission, or that the optical depth was varying in an in-
termediate range. Variable extinction may still play a
role, but even if it did, it does not introduce any time
lag between diﬀerent wavelengths. Therefore, the source
of the variable part of the YLW 16B radiation should
geometrically be in the magnetically conﬁned accreting
columns right above the photosphere of the protostar.

Given the edge-on geometry of YLW 16B, the disk
emission we see should mostly come from the far side
of the inner rim (Lahuis et al. 2006; Bast et al. 2013).
Therefore, to have the direct stellar light curve (from
the near side) and responding disk light curve (from the
far side) correlated, the source of the variability signals
must be seen from both sides. The only satisfactory place
for this source is near the limb on the star. Such visi-
bility can be naturally explained if the variability signals
are from the accreting gas, because the accretion fun-
nels should hit the star near the magnetic poles, which
are likely near or even aligned with the stellar rotation
axis. These areas should always be near the limb of the
edge-on star as seen from the observer.

3.3. Relative Flux Contribution of Each Source

Building a spectral energy distribution (SED) model
that ﬁts the available measurements of YLW 16B at all
time is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, with this
analysis we aim to dissect the YSO to estimate the ﬂux
contribution of each emitting entity at our working wave-
lengths at the epoch of the reverberation experiment.
This analysis will help us understand the observations of
variations among the source components.

3.3.1. Color Blending

Considering the highly variable nature of the source,
to deconvolve the colors of the individual source compo-
nents we should only adopt the data taken at the time of
the reverberation experiment. However, using our pho-
tometry ignores the color terms for the ﬁlters and for
the source SEDs, which are not possible to be corrected
given the strong variability of the source. Therefore, the
H and K band photometry of the reverberation observa-
tions is not precisely on the 2MASS standard scale. The
diﬀerences in bandpass may introduce systematic errors,

6

Meng et al. 2016

(cid:113)

because the extinction law and colors of young stars are
established based on the 2MASS deﬁnitions of JHKs
wavebands. To overcome the problem, we chose to use
the 2MASS photometry, but only picked values that are
representative of the state of the YLW 16B system at the
time of the reverberation experiment.

For this purpose, we compared the averaged reverber-
ation H and K magnitudes to their counterparts in the
multi-epoch 2MASS calibration ﬁeld photometry (Parks
et al. 2014) by computing their combined magnitude dif-
ferences, deﬁned as

MD =

(Hreverb − H2M ASS)2 + (Kreverb − Ks,2M ASS)2
(1)
The average magnitudes of the reverberation observa-
tions are H = 12.14, K = 9.29, and [4.5] = 5.75. The
smallest diﬀerence in all 2MASS entries is MD,min =
0.132 magnitude, with the color of

(J − H)obs = 4.122 ± 0.046
(H − Ks)obs = 2.663 ± 0.014

There are 21 sets of 2MASS measurements with MD ≤
3MD,min. Averaging all of them yields essentially the
same color indices within errors, which means the color
is insensitive to our selections. In the following calcula-
tions we used the single 2MASS measurement with the
minimum MD, and assumed that it resembles what the
reverberation photometry should be if calibrated to the
2MASS standard.
In addition to reconciling the deﬁ-
nitions of the wavebands, another important beneﬁt of
using the 2MASS data is the inclusion of J band pho-
tometry, which is more sensitive to the extinction and
stellar output and thus provides better constraints on
the component deconvolution.

The observed color of the YSO is made up of three
components, the radiation from the stellar photosphere,
from the inner disk, and from the accreting gas, all be-
hind the foreground extinction along the line of sight,

yielding(cid:18) FJ
(cid:18) FH

FH

(cid:19)obs
(cid:19)obs

FKs

10−0.4AJ(cid:0)F ∗
10−0.4AH(cid:0)F ∗
10−0.4AH(cid:0)F ∗
10−0.4AKs(cid:0)F ∗

=

=

(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)

J

J + F disk
H + F disk
H + F disk
+ F disk

J + F gas
H + F gas
H + F gas
+ F gas
Ks

Ks

Ks

H

H

(2)

(3)

where F is ﬂux density, and A is the extinction in mag-
nitudes. Subscripts and superscripts denote the wave-
bands and sources of radiation, respectively. Although
the adopted set of 2MASS photometry is the closest in
brightness to our reverberation observations, to be con-
servative, in the equations we did not connect it to the
4.5 µm reverberation photometry because of the non-
simultaneity. The averaged 4.5 µm photometry of the
reverberation experiment is left for a consistency check
of the JHKs-based models.

We took the colors of young stellar photospheres from
observations (Luhman et al. 2010). Given M2 as the
approximate spectral type of YLW 16B, we adopted the
intrinsic color of the photosphere as
(J − H)∗ = 0.70
(H − Ks)∗ = 0.20

(Ks − [4.5])∗ = 0.17

The radiation of the inner disk should be close to a black-
body (Monnier & Millan-Gabet 2002; Muzerolle et al.
2003). Assuming a temperature of 1100 K (see §3.2 for
the temperature estimate), the disk color should be

(J − H)disk = 2.47
(H − Ks)disk = 1.58
(Ks − [4.5])disk = 2.51

We ﬁnd that the extinction law speciﬁcally determined in
ρ Ophiuchi is not accurate enough for our purpose (Elias
1978; Kenyon et al. 1998). Fortunately, the infrared ex-
tinction law of ρ Ophiuchi is practically identical to that
of other star-forming regions (Harris et al. 1978; Flaherty
et al. 2007). Here we adopted the generic extinction law
for 2MASS and Spitzer wavebands (Flaherty et al. 2007;
Chapman et al. 2009), where

AJ = 2.5AKs
AH = 1.55AKs
A[4.5] = 0.53AKs

(4)
(5)
(6)

V1/V2

We assume S as the disk emitting area in units of the
area of the observable surface of the protostar. Then,
we can construct all ﬂuxes by introducing proper ratios
of the ﬂuxes between diﬀerent wavebands, sources, and
temperatures. If a ﬂux ratio is ηC
, where V1 and V2
are the varied conditions (e.g., wavelengths or tempera-
tures) and C is the common condition, the unreddened
ﬂux at the i-th waveband in a set of n-band photometry
can be written as
F ∗
λi
F disk
λi
F gas

T ∗/T disk η∗
ηλn
Sηdisk
λi/λn
gas/∗ηgas
ηλn

= Edisk
= F ∗

= Edisk

λi/λn

(8)

(7)

(9)

λn

λn

λn

λi/λn

λi

λn

where Edisk
is the disk ﬂux emitted per unit area at the
longest (n-th) wavelength. If the accreting gas is opti-
cally thin, its free-free emission should have a spectrum
with

(cid:19)−0.1

ηgas
λi/λn

(10)

=

(cid:18) λn
(cid:34) η∗

λi

J/Ks

η∗

Then, equation 2 and 3 become

(cid:19)obs

(cid:18) FJ

FH

10−AKs
10−0.62AKs

=

(cid:19)obs

(cid:18) FH

FKs

=

ηKs
3600K/1100K + ηdisk
J/Ks
ηKs
3600K/1100K + ηdisk
H/Ks

S

S

(cid:16) λKs
(cid:16) λKs

λJ

(cid:17)−0.1
(cid:17)−0.1

H/Ks
3600K/1100KηKs

gas/∗

3600K/1100KηKs

× +ηKs
+ηKs

(cid:34) η∗

10−0.62AKs
10−0.4AKs
× +ηKs

+ηKs

λH

H/Ks

gas/∗
ηKs
3600K/1100K + ηdisk
H/Ks
ηKs
3600K/1100K + S
gas/∗( λKs
λH
3600K/1100KηKs
gas/∗

)−0.1

3600K/1100KηKs


(cid:35)

(11)

S

(12)

In equation 11 and 12, the ﬂux ratios on the left are
directly known from the observed color of the YSO; all

Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

7

η values on the right hand side, except for ηKs
gas/∗, are
known either from Planck’s law or from the observation-
based intrinsic color of the young stellar photosphere
(Luhman et al. 2010). Therefore, the equations are
model-independent. Now we have two equations and
three free parameters, AKs , S, and ηKs
gas/∗, the Ks-band
scale factor of the emission of the accreting gas compared
to the stellar photospheric ﬂux. For any given value of
ηKs
gas/∗, we can numerically solve for AKs and S.
Taking in the 2MASS photometry with the minimum
MD from the reverberation observations, we found that
AKs and S are not sensitive to ηKs
gas/∗ within a gener-
ous range. Although the accurate value of ηKs
gas/∗ at the
time of the reverberation experiment is unknown, a lower
limit is constrained by the hourly peak-to-peak ampli-
tude of 20% observed in both H and K bands. At 4.5
µm, thanks to the dominance of the disk emission, the
same variable component may only cause a peak-to-peak
amplitude (cid:46)10%, which would have been submerged in
the noise (RMS ∼ 8%) of the Spitzer/IRAC data. That
being said, the amplitude of the disk response is much
greater than that of the original signal. This would be
naturally explained if the triggering signals are causing
temperature (or chemical) changes in the disk (cf. Fla-
herty et al. 2014).

Accordingly, for ηKs

gas/∗ = 0.25, which would mean that
the accretion excess can just account for the observed
amplitude in K band, we obtained AKs = 3.32 and
S = 142; for ηKs
gas/∗ = 1, which would mean that the
accretion excess is as strong as that of the stellar photo-
spheric ﬂux in K band, AKs = 3.46 and S = 141. This
degeneracy is because the ﬂux density of the stellar pho-
tosphere of a young M2 star peaks in H band (Luhman
et al. 2010), causing a relatively ﬂat SED over the JHKs
wavebands, similar to that of the optically thin free-free
emission assumed for the accreting gas. Extrapolating
the color-blending equations to 4.5 µm, for ηKs
gas/∗ val-
ues between 0.25 and 1, the predicted magnitude is in
the range of 5.76 to 5.78, in good agreement with the
averaged reverberation photometry [4.5] = 5.75. Larger
values of ηKs
gas/∗ would mean that the accretion excess
dominates over the stellar photospheric emission in K
band, and would predict fainter [4.5] magnitudes, which
are not supported by the observations.

3.3.2. Implications for Disk Properties

Two byproducts of the color-blending equations are the
extinction AKs and the disk emitting area S. The extinc-
tion law with RV = 3.1 gives AV /AKs = 8.8 (Cardelli
et al. 1989; Indebetouw et al. 2005)16. Accordingly, the
AKs obtained from the equations would mean AV ∼ 30,
consistent with the extinction level of the region (Evans
et al. 2003).

S is deﬁned as the ratio between the disk emitting area,
presumably the observable surface of the inner rim, and
the observable area of the protostar. Without extinction,

16 The extinction ratio for ρ Ophiuchi is less well determined
but indicates AV /AK ∼ 10.5 (Harris et al. 1978; Vrba et al. 1993),
indicating a slightly higher extinction of AV ∼ 35.

the observable area of the protostar should be equal to its
cross section. However, disk veiling over the protostar,
which is not considered in the equations, may reduce the
equivalent of its “observable area”, leading to larger val-
ues of S. Such behavior is more likely for edge-on systems
like YLW 16B. Therefore, if we know the radii of the pro-
tostar and of the inner disk hole, the value of S can be
used to place an upper limit on the observable area of the
disk inner rim. The radius of YLW 16B was estimated
to be R∗ = 2.4 R(cid:12) based on the BT-Settl model for a
1 Myr old M2 star with solar-like metallicity. Consider-
ing the contraction of the protostar as it evolves towards
zero age main sequence, the estimate is in good agree-
ment with the observed sizes of slightly older pre-main
sequence stars (5-30 Myr old) with similar mass (Pecaut
& Mamajek 2013). Given the radius of the inner disk
rim at 0.084 AU (as derived in the following subsection),
the S values obtained from the equations correspond to
an upper limit of ∼0.2 AU, i.e., < ±0.1 AU from the
mid-plane, for the height of the inner disk rim if we only
see the far side of it. This generous limit does not pro-
vide a useful constraint, as it can accommodate models
that involve a “puﬀed-up” inner disk rim (Dullemond &
Monnier 2010), as well as the classical, geometrically thin
disk model (Hillenbrand et al. 1992).

3.4. Photo-reverberation Measurement

In summary, the variable signals in H and K bands
should be mostly from the emission of the accreting gas
near the stellar photosphere, whereas the signals ob-
served at 4.5 µm should be dominated by the disk re-
sponse. This explains the observed simultaneity between
the time series in H and K as well as the lag at 4.5 µm.
Analysis of molecular spectral features suggests that
YLW 16B is close to edge-on (Lahuis et al. 2006; Bast
et al. 2013), in which case the observed disk continuum
is mostly from the far side of the inner disk wall (Lahuis
et al. 2006). Such a viewing angle requires the triggering
signals from the protostar to travel an additional dis-
tance before reaching us. To ﬁrst order approximation,
assuming the inner disk radius is azimuthally uniform,
the average additional travel distance of the lagged sig-

nals should be (cid:90) π
(cid:90) π

0

Rin sin2 θdθ

sin θdθ

=

π
4

Rin

(13)

0

where θ is the azimuthal angle and Rin is the radius
of the inner disk rim, which, given the observed time
lag between H/K and 4.5 µm in YLW 16B, should be
0.084 ± 0.004 AU. The nominal uncertainty of 0.004 AU
only accounts for the propagated error from CCF center-
ing and noise evalution, and should be taken as a lower
limit. In converting the time lag to the inner disk radius,
we had to adopt several assumptions and simpliﬁcations,
such as an isotropic radiation ﬁeld of the protostar, az-
imuthal uniformity of the disk, negligible the disk rim
curvature, simpliﬁed geometry etc, which may be signiﬁ-
cant error sources beyond the observational noise. How-
ever, these errors are very diﬃcult, if at all possible, to
be quantitatively estimated with the available data. The
total error of the radius of the inner disk rim is likely

8

Meng et al. 2016

higher by a factor of several, on the order of 0.01 AU.

4. DISCUSSION

4.1. Disk Truncation Mechanisms

The photo-reverberation measurement provides an in-
dependent veriﬁcation of the current paradigm of the ge-
ometry and physics of the inner disk, which has been
largely based on model-dependent interferometric re-
sults. Therefore, we will compare it with the expected
radii from various truncation mechanisms.

To carry out this test, ﬁrst we estimated the prop-
erties of the protostar and the accretion disk of YLW
16B at the time of the reverberation experiment. The
total luminosity of a YSO is comprised of the intrin-
sic stellar luminosity and the accretion luminosity, i.e.,
Ltot = L∗ + Lacc. The Br γ emission is a well-established
indicator of accretion (Muzerolle et al. 1998). We found
that the equivalent width of this line is highly variable
in the quasi-contemporary SpeX spectra (Figure 6(A)),
ranging from -2.0 ˚A on March 27 to -4.8 ˚A on April 2.
After converting the range to Br γ luminosity (LBrγ) and
compensating for extinction of AKs = 3.3, we used the
relation (Natta et al. 2006)

log (Lacc/L(cid:12)) = 0.9 [log (LBrγ/L(cid:12)) + 4] − 0.7

(14)

to derive an accretion luminosity of YLW 16B between
0.31 and 0.63 L(cid:12).

On the other hand, the stellar luminosity of YLW
16B is highly uncertain. The isochrones between stel-
lar models are signiﬁcantly divergent towards younger
ages and lower masses (Baraﬀe et al. 2002; Hillenbrand
et al. 2008). Together with the large error in the eﬀective
temperature, we could only estimate a vast range from
0.1 to 2 L(cid:12). To obtain better constraints, we took an al-
ternative approach by integrating the 2MASS photome-
try that is best matched with the reverberation averages
with the minimum MD. We found that the combined
2MASS JHKs luminosity of the YSO is 0.56 L(cid:12). Refer-
ring to the color-blending equations in §3.2, the viable
range of ηKs
gas/∗ from 0.25 to 1 means the protostar, if
integrated over the JHKs wavebands, should contribute
between 38% and 51% of the total ﬂux. Meanwhile, we
extrapolated the observed colors of young stellar photo-
spheres (Luhman et al. 2010) with the Wien approxima-
tion (towards shorter wavelengths) and Rayleigh-Jeans
law (towards longer wavelengths). For K6 to M6 stars
that correspond to the range of possible temperature of
YLW 16B, we found the combined JHKs ﬂux makes 21%
to 22% of the entire stellar luminosity (integrated from
0.1 to 5000 µm), and is insensitive to the spectral type.
Therefore, the stellar luminosity of YLW 16B can be nar-
rowed down to 0.96 to 1.35 L(cid:12). Added to the range of
accretion luminosity, this makes the total luminosity of
the YSO between 1.27 and 1.98 L(cid:12). Finally, we adopted
M∗ = 0.7 M(cid:12) for the stellar mass based on BT-Settl
models, with the uncertainties allowing values from 0.5
to 1 M(cid:12).

The accretion rate can be obtained by

˙M =

LaccR∗

GM∗(1 − R∗/Rin)

(15)

where Rin = 0.084 AU. For the range of Lacc from
the quasi-contemporary SpeX observations, the accretion

rate of YLW 16B varies between 5.4× 10−8 to 1.1× 10−7
M(cid:12) year−1 around the time of the reverberation experi-
ment, with an average of ∼ 8 × 10−8 M(cid:12) year−1.
The magnetic ﬁeld of the protostar plays a critical role
in the accretion process. Though the detailed topology
of the magnetic ﬁeld may be complex (Johns-Krull &
Cauley 2014), an important and model-independent met-
ric is the corotation radius, Rcor, at which the Keplerian
orbital period of circumstellar material matches the ro-
tation period of the star. The corotation radius is at the
balance of star-disk interaction; for accretion onto the
star to proceed, the magnetospheric truncation radius
has to stay interior to Rcor (Bouvier et al. 2007). The
corotation radius is given by

(cid:18) M∗

(cid:19)1/3(cid:18) P∗

(cid:19)2/3

Rcor
1 AU

= 1.957 × 10−2

M(cid:12)

1 day

(16)

where P∗ is the stellar rotation period, which is un-
known for YLW 16B. Nevertheless, given the color of
[3.6] − [8.0] = 2.42 (Gutermuth et al. 2009) and the cor-
relation between rotation periods and IRAC excessess
(Rebull et al. 2006), one stellar rotation of YLW 16B
likely lasts between 6 and 10 days. Thus, the corota-
tion radius should be in the range from 0.06 to 0.08 AU.
This range, if considered as the upper limit for the mag-
netospheric truncation radii,
is marginally compatible
with our photo-reverberation measurement. Therefore,
magnetospheric truncations, which should occur at even
smaller radii, are unlikely to be the determining mecha-
nism for the size of the inner disk rim of YLW 16B.

Since the dust sublimation radius depends on the total
luminosity of the central star, diﬀerent disk models can
be compared with the observations in a size-luminosity
diagram (Millan-Gabet et al. 2007), as shown in Fig-
ure 9. Based on interferometric measurements, the size-
luminosity diagram has been used to suggest that some
accretion disks around high mass Herbig Be stars are
“classical”17, i.e., optically thick but geometrically thin.
In comparison, disks around intermediate mass Herbig
Ae stars can be well described by a directly heated and
back-warmed “puﬀed-up” inner rim at 1500-2000 K (Eis-
ner et al. 2004), resulting in a weak trend toward rela-
tively increasing apparent sublimination temperatures.
However, the trend does not necessarily extrapolate to
the regime of solar-mass T Tauri stars, many of which
appear to have larger inner disk cavities. Oversized in-
ner disk holes around T Tauri stars have raised ques-
tions about the roles of possibly unrecognized physical
processes, such as lower dust sublimation temperatures,
magnetospheric pressure (Eisner et al. 2007), or viscosity
heating (Muzerolle et al. 2004).

As an independent conﬁrmation, the reverberation in-
ner radius of YLW 16B is larger than the model pre-
diction for a geometrically thin “classical” disk, but is
consistent with a “puﬀed-up” inner disk rim truncated
at ∼1500 K in the presence of backwarming, a natural
outcome of the bulk disk behind the inner wall. This re-
sembles the disk sizes around higher mass Herbig Ae stars
(Millan-Gabet et al. 2007; Dullemond & Monnier 2010)
and does not require any additional mechanism. The
result is qualitatively consistent with recent work that

17 Out of range in Figure 9. See Millan-Gabet et al. (2007).

Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

9

shows the interferometric radius of T Tauri star disks
consistent with dust sublimation radii if scattered light
is considered (Anthonioz et al. 2015).

4.2. Shape Constraints

Harries (2011) built a radiative transfer model based
on a ﬂared disk geometry and computed the expected
time lags over a range of wavelengths. By coincidence,
the starting point was a hypothetical star with properties
similar to those of YLW 16B: Tef f ∼ 4000 K, L∗ ∼ 1 L(cid:12),
and inclination i = 60◦. In his model, the radius of the
inner disk rim is assumed as 0.093 AU. The response sig-
nal at 4.5 µm is a combination of thermal and scattered
emission from a range of stellocentric radii in the disk.
The model predicts a time lag at 4.5 µm of ∼180 seconds,
about twice the round-trip light travel time between the
protostar and the disk inner rim. If this relation holds
for YLW 16B, given the possible range of the total lumi-
nosity, the disk inner rim would have a radius of 0.037
AU with temperatures of 2200 - 2400 K (Dullemond &
Monnier 2010), probably inside the corotation radius and
much hotter than the typical dust sublimation temper-
ature of ∼1500 K. If this were the case, the dust in the
inner disk would either have to be highly refractory, or
short-lived before sublimation. The disk would be trun-
cated by the magnetosphere very close to the protostar
and ﬂared at all stellocentric distances as assumed in
the Harries (2011) model. Otherwise, the disk may be
self-shadowed with only a limited radial span exposed to
stellar insolation, in which case the Harries (2011) model
is not applicable, and the observed time lag at 4.5 µm
simply corresponds to the light travel time to the eﬀec-
tive radius of the inner disk rim.

To identify the disk geometry of YLW 16B, we noticed
that the SED of the system suggests some degree of self-
shadowing (Figure 8(D), also see the detailed modeling
in Lahuis et al. 2006). Here we additionally test if the
widths of the CCFs can be used to constrain the radial
extent of the inner disk (cf. Isella & Natta 2005; Tan-
nirkulam et al. 2007). A considerable radial span of the
inner disk that is exposed to the starlight should lead to
a superposition of various time lags, and thus broaden
the widths of the CCFs.

A problem speciﬁc to our case of YLW 16B is that each
pair of wavebands has diﬀerent overlaps of time coverage,
while the lengths of the overlaps and the waveform of the
light curve therein could be a determining factor in yield-
ing diﬀerent widths of the CCFs. Therefore, we carried
out the test by computing the CCFs based on the sec-
ond night’s data between 12131.0 and 19179.2 seconds in
BMJD TDB, where we have the longest uninterrupted
time coverage overlap in all wavebands (Figure 3). The
standard deviations of the Gaussian ﬁts of the CCFs over
this time are fairly close: 520 seconds for H (cid:63) K, 540 sec-
onds for H (cid:63) [4.5], and 510 seconds for K (cid:63) [4.5]. The
similarity of all three CCF widths suggest the lack of a
signiﬁcant “broadening eﬀect” at 4.5 µm as would be ex-
pected from a fully ﬂaring disk (Dullemond & Dominik
2004; Harries 2011), and instead favors the geometry of
a self-shadowed disk.

For a more quantitative evaluation, we created a set
of artiﬁcially smoothed light curves in K by computing
the unweighted moving average of the original K-band
time series over a window of varying length of time, and

computed their CCFs with the original H-band data.
The purpose of using both H and K is to mimic a time
series with superposed time lags and independent noise,
and assess the sensitivity of the CCF width to the degree
of superposition, because the variations in the original
H and K time series are both expected to be from the
accreting gas with no time lag.

As a result, given the limited waveform and common
time coverage, we found the CCF width fairly insensitive
to time lag superposition. If rounded to the nearest 10
seconds, the standard deviation of the H (cid:63) smoothed K
CCF does not reach 530 seconds (the next possible value
broader than that of the original H (cid:63) K) until K is aver-
aged over a window > 400 seconds. To make the width
of H (cid:63) smoothed K greater than 580 seconds (i.e., 3σ
broader than those of the original CCFs), the smooth-
ing window has to be > 950 seconds, which is the upper
limit of any “broadening eﬀect” at 4.5 µm. If the ther-
mal reprocessing time of the disk is negligible, the size
of the smoothing window translates to a 3σ upper limit
of ∼1 AU for the starlight-exposed radial extent of the
disk inner edge. This limit is much smaller than the ex-
tent of the whole disk as indicated by the very red WISE
color W 3−W 4 = 2.83, corroborating a self-shadowed ge-
ometry over intermediate disk radii. However, this does
not eliminate the possibility of optically thin gas and/or
small amounts of refractory dust inside the rim (e.g.,
Tannirkulam et al. 2008; Benisty et al. 2010; Fischer et
al. 2011).

As an explanation for larger interferometric disk hole
sizes, it has been suggested that scattered light may in-
ﬂate the interferometric measurements of the sizes of the
inner disk cavities around T Tauri stars (Pinte et al.
2008). However, the reverberation results for YLW 16B
are incompatible with such scattered light models, which
rely on the assumption of a ﬂaring disk. The models re-
quire a large radial extent of the disk to contribute to
the scattering (Pinte et al. 2008), fundamentally incom-
patible to a self-shadowed disk geometry. Such diversity
in disk geometry might also explain why the “composite
disk model”, which considers both thermal and scattered
emission, provides better ﬁts to the interferometric data
of some T Tauri stars, but is ineﬀective in other cases
(Anthonioz et al. 2015).

5. CONCLUSIONS

To test mapping the inner disk sizes of YSOs with
photo-reverberation measurements, we selected a region
in L1688 in the ρ Ophiuchi star-forming region, based on
its proximity and high concentration of known variable
YSOs. Near-simultaneous time-series photometric ob-
servations were conducted on April 20, 22, and 24, 2010,
with four ground-based telescopes operating in H and
K bands and the Spitzer Space Telescope observing at
4.5 µm. Each session of Spitzer staring mode monitoring
lasted ∼8 hours. One (YLW 16B) out of twenty-seven
sources detected was found to have mutually correlated
hourly variations in all three wavebands. Over all three
nights, the time series measurements of YLW 16B in H
and K bands are consistently synchronized, while the
light curve at 4.5 µm lags behind both H and K by
74.5± 3.2 seconds over the ﬁrst two nights when we have
usable 4.5 µm data.

Analysis of the variability of YLW 16B suggests that

10

Meng et al. 2016

the hourly variations likely originate from the accreting
gas right above the stellar photosphere. The variable
component of the ﬂux in H and K bands is primar-
ily from the accreting gas; the variability at 4.5 µm is
dominated by the response of the inner disk rim. Con-
sidering the nearly edge-on, self-shadowed geometry of
the disk, we derived the eﬀective distance between the
star and the inner disk rim to be 0.084 AU on aver-
age, with an uncertainty of order 0.01 AU. The size of
the inner disk rim is likely larger than required by mag-
netospheric accretion, but is consistent with a “puﬀed-
up” disk terminated at the dust sublimation radius of
∼1500 K in the presence of disk backwarming. The disk
truncation mechanism of YLW 16B is similar to that of
higher mass Herbig Ae stars. The measurement does
not agree with the model-dependent interferometric re-
sults that suggest larger than expected inner disk cavities
around T Tauri stars (Eisner et al. 2007), but is consis-
tent with some of the recent measurements that consider
scattered light (Anthonioz et al. 2015) The widths of the
cross-correlation functions between the data in diﬀerent
wavebands place a 3σ upper limit of ∼1 AU for the radial
extent of the inner disk front.

We found that photo-reverberation is a viable tech-
nique to explore unresolved protoplanetary accretion
disks. The method can be applied to other YSOs, pre-
selected for hourly or faster near-infrared variability, at
more wavelengths and more epochs. Such a program will
measure the sizes of the inner disk walls and probe their
time variability and azimuthal uniformity.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank Rachel Akeson, John Carpenter,
Kevin Flaherty, Lynne Hillenbrand, Heather Knutson,
Patrick Ogle, Inseok Song, Karl Stapelfeldt, and Barbara
Whitney for their contributions to the YSOVAR project
and valuable discussions on this work. HYAM acknowl-
edges the support from the IPAC Visiting Graduate Re-
search Fellowship program. PP acknowledges the work
of Nancy Silbermann, William Mahoney, and the Spitzer
scheduling team in scheduling the data volume-intensive
observations, and thanks Greg Doppmann for providing
the Keck/NIRSPEC spectrum. KRC acknowledges sup-
port provided by the NSF through grant AST-1449476.
AMW thanks the staﬀ of the Observatorio Astron´omico
Nacional in Sierra San Pedro M´artir. This work is based
in part on observations made with the Spitzer Space Tele-
scope, which is operated by the Jet Propulsion Labo-
ratory, California Institute of Technology under a con-
tract with NASA. Support for this work was provided by
NASA through an award issued by JPL/Caltech.

Facilities:

CTIO:1.3m, Mayall, OANSPM:HJT,

SOAR, Spitzer (IRAC)

REFERENCES

Akeson, R. L., Walker, C. H., Wood, K. et al. 2005, ApJ, 622, 440
Allard, F., Homeier, D. & Freytag, B. 2012, in ASP Conf. Ser.

448, 16th Cambridge Workshop on Cool Stars, Stellar Systems,
and the Sun, ed. C. M. Johns-Krull, M. K. Browning, & A. A.
West (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 91

Allen, L., Myers, P. C., Di Francesco, J. et al. 2002 ApJ, 566, 993
Anthonioz, F., M´enard, F., Pinte, C. et al. 2015, A&A, 574, 41
Ballard, S., Charbonneau, D., Deming, D. et al., 2010, PASP,

122, 1341

Baraﬀe, I., Chabrier, G., Allard, F. & Hauschildt, P. H. 2002,

A&A, 382, 563

Barsony, M., Ressler, M. E. & Marsh, K. A. 2005, ApJ, 630, 381
Bast, J. E., Lahuis, F., van Dishoeck, E. F. & Tielens, A. G. G.

2013, A&A, 551, 118

Benisty, M., Natta, A., Isella, A. et al. 2010, A&A, 511, 74
Bouvier, J., Alencar, S. H. P., Harries, T. J., Johns-Krull, C. M.
& Romanova, M. M. 2007, in Protostars and Planets V, ed. B.
Reipurth, D. Jewitt, & K. Keil (Tucson, AZ: Univ. Arizona
Press), 479

Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G. C. & Mathis, J. S. 1989, ApJ, 345, 245
Carpenter, J. M., Hillenbrand, L. A. & Skrutskie, M. F. 2001, AJ,

121, 3160

Chapman, N. L., Mundy, L. G., Lai, S.-P. & Evans, N. J., II 2009,

ApJ, 690, 496

Cody, A. M. & Hillenbrand, L. A. 2011, ApJ, 741, 9
Cody, A. M., Stauﬀer, J., Baglin, A. et al. 2014, AJ, 147, 82
Doppmann, G.W., Greene, T.P., Covey, K.R. & Lada, C.J. 2005,

AJ, 130, 1145

Dullemond, C. P. & Dominik, C. 2004, A&A, 417, 159
Dullemond, C. P. & Monnier, J. D. 2010, ARA&A, 48, 205
Dunham, M. M., Stutz, A. M., Allen, L. E. et al. 2014, in

Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen, C. P.
Dullemond & T. Henning (Tucson, AZ: Univ. Arizona Press),
195

Eisner, J. A., Lane, B. F., Hillenbrand, L. A., Akeson, R. L. &

Sargent, A. I. 2004, ApJ, 613, 1049

Eisner, J. A., Hillenbrand, L. A., White, R. J. et al. 2007, ApJ,

669, 1072

Elias, J. H. 1978, ApJ, 224, 453
Evans, N. J., II et al. 2003, PASP, 115, 965
Faesi, C. M., Covey, K. R., Gutermuth, R. et al. 2012, PASP,

124, 1137

Fazio, G. G. et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 10
Fischer, W., Edwards, S., Hillenbrand, L. & Kwan, J. 2011, ApJ,

730, 73

Flaherty, K. M., Pipher, J. L., Megeath, S. T. et al. 2007, ApJ,

663, 1069

Flaherty, K. M., Muzerolle, J., Wolk, S. J. et al. 2014, ApJ, 793, 2
Guenther, E. & Hessman, F. V. 1993, A&A, 268, 192
G¨unther, H. M., Cody, A. M., Covey, K. R. et al. 2014, AJ, 148,

122

Gutermuth, R. A., Megeath, S. T., Myers, P. C. et al. 2009,

ApJS, 184, 18

Hartmann, L., Hewett, R. & Calvet, N. 1994, ApJ, 426, 669
Harries, T. J. 2011, MNRAS, 416, 1500
Harris, D. H., Woolf, N. J. & Rieke, G. H. 1978, ApJ, 226, 829
Hillenbrand L.A., Strom, S.E., Vrba, F.J. & Keene, J. 1992, ApJ,

397, 613

Hillenbrand, L. A., Bauermeister, A. & White, R. J. 2008, in ASP

Conf. Ser. 384, 14th Cambridge Workshop on Cool Stars,
Stellar Systems, and the Sun, ed. G. van Belle (San Francisco,
CA: ASP), 200

Hillenbrand, L. A., Miller, A. A., Covey, K. R. et al. 2013, AJ,

145, 59

Indebetouw, R., Mathis, J. S., Babler, B. L. et al. 2005, ApJ, 619,

931

Isella, A. & Natta, A. 2005, A&A, 438, 899
Ishihara, D., Onaka, T., Kataza, H. et al. 2010, A&A, 514, 1
Johns-Krull, C. M. & Cauley, P. W. 2014, in EPJ Web of Conf.
64, Physics at the Magnetospheric Boundary, ed. E. Bozzo, P.
Kretschmar, M. Audard,M. Falanga, & C. Ferrigno (Geneva,
Switzerland: EPJ), 08003

Kenyon, S. J., Lada, E. A. & Barsony, M. 1998, AJ, 115, 252
Knutson, H. A., Charbonneau, D., Allen, L. E., Burrows, A. &

Megeath, S. T. 2008, ApJ, 673, 526

K¨onigl, A. 1991, ApJ, 370, L39
Lahuis, F., van Dishoeck, E. F., Boogert, A. C. A. et al. 2006,

ApJ, 636, L145

Lawrence, A., Warren, S. J., Almaini, O. et al. 2007, MNRAS,

379, 1599

Luhman, K. L., Allen, P. R., Espaillat, C., Hartmann, L. &

Calvet, N., 2010, ApJS, 186, 111

McClure, M. K., D’Alessio, P., Calvet, N. et al. 2013, ApJ, 775,

114

Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

11

Millan-Gabet, R., Malbet, F., Akeson, R. et al. 2007, in

Protostars and Planets V, ed. B. Reipurth, D. Jewitt, & K.
Keil (Tucson, AZ: Univ. Arizona Press), 539

Monnier, J.D. & Millan-Gabet, R. 2002, ApJ, 579, 694
Muzerolle, J., Hartmann, L. & Calvet, N. 1998, AJ, 116, 2965
Muzerolle, J., Calvet, N., Hartmann, L. & D’Alessio, P. 2003,

ApJ, 597, L149

Muzerolle, J., D’Alessio, P., Calvet, N. & Hartmann, L. 2004,

ApJ, 617, 406

Natta, A., Testi, L. & Randich, S. 2006, A&A, 452, 245
Nguyen, D. C., Scholz, A., van Kerkwijk, M. H., Jayawardhana,

R. & Brandeker, A. 2009, ApJ, 694, L153

Rebull, L. M., Stauﬀer, J. R., Megeath, S. T., Hora, J. L. &

Hartmann, L. 2006, ApJ, 646, 297

Skrutskie, M. F. et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 1163
Spitzer Science Center. 2015, IRAC High Precision Photometry

(Pasadena, CA: SSC),
http://irachpp.spitzer.caltech.edu/page/IRAC IAU 2015/
Stauﬀer, J., Cody, A. M., Baglin, A. et al. 2014, AJ, 147, 83
Stauﬀer, J., Cody, A. M., McGinnis, P. et al. 2015, AJ, 149, 130
Tannirkulam, A., Harries, T. J. & Monnier, J. D. 2007, ApJ, 661,

374

Tannirkulam, A., Monnier, J. D., Millan-Gabet, R. et al. 2008,

ApJ, 677, L51

Parks, J. R., Plavchan, P., White, R. J. & Gee, A. H. 2014, ApJS,

van Kempen, T. A., van Dishoeck, E. F., Salter, D. M. et al.

211, 3

Pecaut, M. J. & Mamajek, E. E. 2013, ApJS, 208, 9
Pinte, C., M`enard, F., Berger, J. P., Benisty, M. & Malbet, F.

2008, ApJ, 673, L63

Plavchan, P., Jura, M., Kirkpatrick, J.D., Cutri, R.M. &

Gallagher, S.C. 2008, ApJS, 175, 191
Plavchan, P. et al. 2016, in preparation
Pozo Nu˜nez, F., Haas, M., Chini, R. et al. 2015, A&A, 578, 98
Reach, W. T., Megeath, S. T., Cohen, M. et al. 2005, PASP, 117,

2009, A&A, 498, 167

Vrba, F. J., Coyne, G. V. & Tapia, S. 1993, AJ, 105, 1010
Wilking, B. A, Gagn`e, M. & Allen, L. E. 2008, in Handbook of

Star Forming Regions Vol. II, ed. B. Reipurth (San Francisco,
CA: ASP), 351

Williams, J. P. & Cieza, L. A. 2011, ARA&A, 49, 67
Wright, E. L., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Mainzer, A. K. 2010, AJ,

140, 1868

Zhang, L. & Wu, X. 2006, Digital Signal Processing, 16, 682

978

12

Meng et al. 2016

Figure 1. Time coverage of each participating telescope. Intra-night gaps in coverage are not shown. The Mayall/FLAMINGOS data
from the second night and the Spitzer/IRAC data from the third night are not used because of too short time coverage and over-saturation,
respectively.

55306.0 55307.0 55308.0 55309.0 55310.0 55311.0 Barycentric Modified Julian Date Spitzer/IRAC/4.5	μm	Mayall/FLAMINGOS/H	SOAR/Spartan/H	SMARTS	1.3-m/ANDICAM/K	OAN	HLJ	1.5-m/Camila/K	Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

13

Figure 2. Fields of view of the participating telescopes. The background is a full image taken by Mayall/FLAMINGOS in H band, with
all 2MASS sources circled in green. North is up and east is to the left. Overlapped are the ﬁelds of view of Spitzer/IRAC (red), SMARTS
1.3-m/ANDICAM (yellow), OAN Johnson 1.5-m/Camila (magenta), and SOAR/Spartan (cyan). SOAR/Spartan consisted of four separate
detectors, and thus provided a discontinuous ﬁeld of view.

14

Meng et al. 2016

Figure 3. Normalized light curves of YLW 16B. Only the data used for the time lag measurements are plotted. The blue, green, and
red points represent the H, K and 4.5 µm data, and are shifted by −0.1, 0, and +0.1 magnitude for clarity, respectively. The averages of
the nominal photometric errors of each data set are shown in the lower left corner. (A) First night. The amplitude of the 4.5 µm light
curve is too large for eye comparison and is reduced by a factor of 0.5 for illustration purposes only. (B) Second night. For illustration
purposes only, the amplitude of the 4.5 µm light curve is reduced by a factor of 0.3. (C) Third night. The K band data from SMART
1.3-m/ANDICAM and from OAN Johnson 1.5-m/Camila are plotted as crosses and diamonds, respectively.

-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 9000 14000 19000 24000 29000 34000 39000 44000 A-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 9000 14000 19000 24000 29000 34000 39000 44000 Normalized Magnitude BC-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 9000 14000 19000 24000 29000 34000 39000 44000 Barycenteric Modified Julian Date (second) Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

15

Figure 4. Cross-correlation functions of YLW 16B between the H, K, and 4.5 µm time series. The data are shown in time lag (in seconds)
vs 1− ρ, where ρ is the corresponding cross correlation function. the plots are aligned vertically for the day of observations, and horizontally
for the pair of compared wavebands. The measurements of time lags with errors smaller than 5 seconds are labeled with vertical dashed
lines; the 1σ error ranges of those with larger errors are shaded. The H (cid:63) K cross correlations are consistent with a zero time lag within
the errors, while the 4.5 µm data lag behind both H and K by a consistent amount of time, 74.5 ± 3.2 seconds.

16

Meng et al. 2016

Figure 5. Cross-correlations of the YLW 16B spectra with the BT-Settl models. From top to bottom are, sorted in descending order of
wavelength, the combined IRTF/SpeX spectrum in K band, three orders of the Keck/NIRSPEC spectrum near 2.28, 2.22, and 2.10 µm,
and the IRTF/SpeX spectrum in H band.

Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

17

Figure 6. Variations of the emission lines in the quasi-contemporary IRTF/SpeX spectra. (A) Br γ. (B) Na I. (C) Mg I.

0.98%1.00%1.02%1.04%1.06%1.08%1.10%1.12%2.162%2.163%2.164%2.165%2.166%2.167%2.168%2.169%2.170%Normalized+Fν+Wavelength+(μm)+March%27,%2010%April%1,%2010%April%2,%2010%May%7,%2010%ABC0.99$1.00$1.01$1.02$1.03$1.04$2.200$2.202$2.204$2.206$2.208$2.210$2.212$2.214$Normalized+Fν+Wavelength+(μm)+0.90$0.95$1.00$1.05$1.10$1.15$1.483$1.486$1.489$1.492$1.495$1.498$1.501$1.504$1.507$1.510$Normalized+Fν+Wavelength+(μm)+18

Meng et al. 2016

AB9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0 2.55 2.60 2.65 2.70 2.75 2.80 2.85 2.90 2.95 3.00 3.05 Kobs (H-K)obs Reverberation Photometry (Day 1) Reverberation Photometry (Day 2) 2MASS Extinction Vector Protostar with Cool Spots (2000 K) Protostar with Hot Spots (8000 K) Spotless Protostar + Optically Thin Accreting Gas (Free-free Emission) Spotless Protostar + Optically Thick Accreting Gas (Blackbody) Spotless Protostar + Variable Disk Emitting Area (1100 K) AV#=#2#6000K#10000K#14000K#9.15 9.20 9.25 9.30 9.35 9.40 9.45 2.73 2.75 2.77 2.79 2.81 2.83 2.85 Kobs (H-K)obs AV#=#0.2#Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

19

Figure 7. Color-magnitude diagram of YLW 16B. (A) Full data set. For the multi-epoch 2MASS calibration data, the vertical and
horizontal bars show the bin size in Ks and the ﬁrst and third quartiles in H − Ks, respectively. They intersect at the mid-range of the Ks
bin and the median H − Ks color. The green and red crosses represent the photometry in the reverberation experiment from the ﬁrst two
nights, combined with individual measurements every 204 seconds. This photometry is not calibrated to the 2MASS photometric system,
and is subject to some shift in H − K (and in K to a lesser extent) when compared with the 2MASS data. However, the ﬁrst two nights’
data were obtained with the same sets of instruments, and are thus internally comparable. H and K photometry from the third night
was made with diﬀerent instrument sets and is not shown. The extinction vector is in grey. The variation models, as indicated in the
legend, are discussed in detail in the text. (B) Zoom-in view of the reverberation photometry. The green and red polar diagrams show the
amplitude and direction of the color-magnitude variation of each two consecutive 204 second-combined measurements, with their origins
at the mean position of each night. The thick grey bar underneath each polar diagram illustrates the error correlation vector for ±0.01
magnitude. This is 5 times larger than the nominal photometric errors in K, and should be the largest correlated error possible.

20

Meng et al. 2016

Figure 8. Time variations of the quasi-contemporary IRTF/SpeX spectra. (A) H band. The continua on March 27 and May 7 are nearly
identical. (B) K band. The continuum on March 27 is signiﬁcantly brighter than on May 7. (C) Diﬀerential spectrum in K band between
March 27 and May 7, 2010, de-reddened and compared with the best-ﬁt free-free and blackbody spectra. (D) Placing the spectra into the
context of the near- to mid-infrared SED of YLW 16B, of which the variability over the years are evident. The 2MASS, UKIDSS (Data
Release 9), HST/NICMOS, Spitzer/IRAC+MIPS, Akari/IRC, WISE (AllWISE Data Release), and Keck II/MERLIN data are based on
Skrutskie et al. (2006); Lawrence et al. (2007); Allen et al. (2002); Gutermuth et al. (2009); Ishihara et al. (2010); Wright et al. (2010);
Barsony et al. (2005), respectively.

ABC0.00#0.01#0.02#0.03#0.04#0.05#0.06#0.07#1.40#1.46#1.52#1.58#1.64#1.70#1.76#1.82#Flux%Density%(Jy)%Wavelength%(μm)%March#27,#2010#April#1,#2010#April#2,#2010#May#7,#2010#0.00#0.05#0.10#0.15#0.20#0.25#0.30#0.35#1.88#1.93#1.98#2.03#2.08#2.13#2.18#2.23#2.28#2.33#2.38#2.43#Flux%Density%(Jy)%Wavelength%(μm)%0.00#0.20#0.40#0.60#0.80#1.00#1.20#1.40#1.60#1.80#1.88#1.93#1.98#2.03#2.08#2.13#2.18#2.23#2.28#2.33#2.38#2.43#Flux%Density%(Jy)%Wavelength%(μm)%De-reddened#Diﬀeren3al#Spectrum#(Mar#27#-#May#7)#Free-free#Emission#Blackbody#(1100#K)#D1.E$05'1.E$04'1.E$03'1.E$02'1.E$01'1.E+00'1.E+01'1'10'Flux%Density%(Jy)%Wavelength%(μm)%2MASS'UKIDSS'HST/NICMOS'(June'1998)'Spitzer/IRAC+MIPS'(March/August'2004)'Spitzer/IRAC'(April'22,'2010,'this'work)'Akari/IRC'WISE'Keck'II/MIRLIN'(June'7,'1998)'IRTF/SpeX'(around'April'2010,'average)'Spitzer/IRS'(August'29,'2004)'Spitzer/IRS'(April'16,'2006)'Spitzer/IRS'(October'13,'2008)'Spitzer/IRS'(April'6,'2009)'Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

21

Figure 9.
Inner disk size-luminosity diagram. Comparison of the photo-reverberation measurement of the inner disk size of YLW 16B
(red) with those constrained by near-infrared interferometric observations (grey, with diﬀerent symbol styles for stellar types). The nominal
uncertainty of the photo-reverberation measurement, 0.004 AU, is smaller than the symbol size and is not plotted. The interferometric
measurements were adopted from Millan-Gabet et al. (2007) and Eisner et al. (2007), combined with those in Anthonioz et al. (2015) based
on the “composite model” for both thermal and scattered emission if the data are ﬁtted with a reduced χ2 ≤ 3. For each sublimation
model, the upper and lower lines represent the dust sublimation temperatures of 1000 K and 1500 K, respectively.

1.E-02	1.E-01	1.E+00	1.E-01	1.E+00	1.E+01	1.E+02	Inner	Disk	Radius	(AU)	Total	Luminosity	(L(cid:805))	Herbig	Ae	Stars	T	Tauri	Stars	T	Tauri	Stars	("composite	model",	Anthonioz	et	al.	2015)	YLW	16B	Direct	HeaJng	Only	Direct	HeaJng	+	Backwarming	Classical	Disk	22

Meng et al. 2016

Index of the sources monitored in the reverberation experiment

Table 1

Running No. R.A. (J2000.0) Dec. (J2000.0)
−24.694553
−24.695297
−24.696545
−24.684280
−24.712814
−24.656410
−24.679209
−24.680784
−24.659307
−24.654497
−24.640238
−24.687576
−24.676695
−24.642612
−24.666201
−24.660892
−24.700497
−24.710560
−24.646027
−24.644220
−24.672409
−24.654318
−24.725475
−24.720852
−24.643461
−24.643972
−24.647396

246.831300
246.839453
246.851625
246.852555
246.859523
246.860373
246.860907
246.862235
246.866781
246.872647
246.881403
246.887968
246.888255
246.896922
246.897239
246.903374
246.904062
246.905206
246.907594
246.910962
246.912269
246.914291
246.914796
246.915951
246.917064
246.923345
246.927932

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

Other Identiﬁers

YLW 13A = IRS 40 = ISO-Oph 130 = GY 250
YLW 13B = IRS 42 = ISO-Oph 132 = GY 252

ISO-Oph 136 = GY 258

ISO-Oph 137

ISO-Oph 139 = GY 260

YLW 16C = ISO-Oph 140 = GY 262

GY 263

YLW 15A = IRS 43 = ISO-Oph 141 = GY 265
YLW 16A = IRS 44 = ISO-Oph 143 = GY 269
YLW 16B = IRS 46 = ISO-Oph 145 = GY 274

2MASS J16273153-2438248

YLW 18 = ISO-Oph 155 = GY 292

2MASS J16273318-2440361

ISO-Oph 156 = GY 295

2MASS J16273533-2439583

GY 298

2MASS J16273697-2442017

ISO-Oph 161 = GY 301

2MASS J16273782-2438456

ISO-Oph 164 = GY 310
ISO-Oph 165 = GY 312
ISO-Oph 166 = GY 314

2MASS J16273955-2443317

YLW 45 = IRS 51 = ISO-Oph 167 = GY 315

GY 317

2MASS J16274160-2438382

ISO-Oph 172 = GY 326

Reverberation Mapping of A Protoplanetary Disk

23

Diﬀerential photometry of all sources monitored in

the reverberation experiment

Table 2

BMJD (Second)a Magnitude Magnitude Error

13630.463
13671.875
13712.933
13773.759
13814.926
13855.654
13916.368
13957.328
13997.946
14154.597
14195.694
14236.787
14297.641
14338.848
14379.502
14440.296
14481.684
14522.168

...

A1 4b
4.297
3.879
3.707
5.389
3.812
4.888
3.824
4.280
4.087
4.732
3.778
5.062
3.970
3.588
4.575
4.706
4.062
4.169

...

0.160
0.107
0.096
0.427
0.099
0.266
0.103
0.154
0.136
0.226
0.100
0.328
0.119
0.082
0.212
0.228
0.125
0.147

...

a Mid-exposure time in barycentric modiﬁed Julian date
in dynamical time (BMJD TDB) second of the day.
b The ﬁle name format is “instrumental initial + day
number + underscore + running number of the star”,
where the instrumental initials are A = ANDICAM, C =
Camila, F = FLAMINGOS, S = Spartan, and the run-
ning numbers are from Table 1. For example, the ﬁle
“A1 4” is the ANDICAM light curve on the ﬁrst night
for star 4 (ISO-Oph 137). A ﬁle name that does not ex-
ist (e.g., “A1 1”) means that the star was not covered by
the instrument on that night.

