Solving Society’s Big Ills, A Small Step

Ravi Kashyap

City University of Hong Kong / Gain Knowledge Group

Keywords: Social, Uncertainty, Small, Organization, Solve,Welfare

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
1

 
 
]

.

N
G
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
4
3
0
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contents

1 Abstract

2 Introduction

3 The Four Pronged Approach

3.1 The Uncertainty Principle of the Social Sciences

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 The Objectives of a Social System or the Responsibilities of the Players . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.1 High Energy Low IQ Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 The Need for Smaller Organizations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.1 Organizations as an Amalgamation of Lego(3) Blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 Redirecting Unintended Outcomes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Discussion

4.1 Small Business as a Solution to Corruption.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 The Existential Question!!!

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 A Way of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 The Path Ahead

5.1 The Compensation Ratio Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Final Thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Conclusion

7 References

1 Abstract

1

2

4

4

4

9

10

15

15

17

17

18

19

22

23

24

25

25

We look at a collection of conjectures with the unifying message that smaller social systems, tend to be less

1

complex and can be aligned better, towards fulﬁlling their intended objectives. We touch upon a framework, referred

to as the four pronged approach that can aid the analysis of social systems. The four prongs are:

1. The Uncertainty Principle of the Social Sciences

2. The Objectives of a Social System or the Responsibilities of the Players

3. The Need for Smaller Organizations

4. Redirecting Unintended Outcomes

Smaller organizations mitigating the disruptive eﬀects of corruption is discussed and also the need for organizations,

whose objective is to foster the development of other smaller organizations. We consider a way of life, which is

about respect for knowledge and a desire to seek it. Knowledge can help eradicate ignorance, but the accumulation

of knowledge can lead to overconﬁdence. Hence it becomes important to instill an attitude that does not knowledge

too seriously, along with the thirst for knowledge. All of this is important to create an environment that is conducive

for smaller organizations and can be viewed as a natural extension of studies that fall under the wider category of

understanding factors and policies aimed at increasing the welfare or well-being to society.

2

Introduction

“We human beings are social beings. We come into the world as the result of others’ actions. We survive here

in dependence on others. Whether we like it or not, there is hardly a moment of our lives when we do not beneﬁt

from others’ activities. For this reason, it is hardly surprising that most of our happiness arises in the context of

our relationships with others.” - Dalai Lama XIV

“Human beings are social creatures. We are social not just in the trivial sense that we like company, and not

just in the obvious sense that we each depend on others. We are social in a more elemental way: simply to exist as

a normal human being requires interaction with other people.” - Atul Gawande

Society and the problems facing society then simply become manifestation of the interactions between human

beings. These interactions are complex and the complexity increases, the greater the scope of what a social system

is trying to accomplish. The greater the number of uncertain human actions that can impact a system, the greater

will be the complexity and uncertainty of that social system. The more the participants in a system, the more will

be the number of actions and hence the human uncertainty element can be reduced by reducing, the number of

2

humans that can impact that social system. While, natural sources of uncertainty certainly abound and can be

extremely impactful, a detailed discussion of those will be postponed for another time.

Conjecture 1. The beauty and also the bane of measurement is that there is always something better

or bigger and there is also something worse or smaller.

This follows partly from the current practice of mapping anything that can be measured to real numbers which

are inﬁnite and noting that the universe seems to be inﬁnite and the smallest particle has not been discovered and

it has not been proved that there is nothing smaller. This means that there is no absolutely satisfactory answer

to the question, how small is small enough? What we can hope to accomplish is establish a relative scale that can

show what an optimal size might be for a particular purpose, by looking look at smaller systems and comparing

them to larger systems with similar objectives, but yielding dissimilar results. The four pronged approach is one

such analysis technique.

We need to consider all the four prongs because the ﬁrst one tells us about the limitations of any relationships we

uncover; the second tells us about the overriding need of any social system and aids in the veriﬁcation of whether

we are deviating from the intended goals; the third tells us that keeping complexity in check is important for

accomplishing our objectives. One way for doing that is to have smaller systems with limited scope; and the fourth

one tells us where unintended outcomes, that provide no real beneﬁt, can result, despite the care we take to adhere

to the stipulations of the ﬁrst three. Just like the four directions, we need to be aware that there is a degree of

interconnectedness in the below four prongs.

1. The Uncertainty Principle of the Social Sciences

2. The Objectives of a Social System or the Responsibilities of the Players

3. The Need for Smaller Organizations

4. Redirecting Unintended Outcomes

Conjecture 2. The four prongs are like the four directions for an army general looking for victory

and any attempt at reform that does not consider all the four prongs will prove to be insuﬃcient

and will be incomplete at best.

The rest of the discussion will substantiate the above claim and its applicability to study social science phe-

nomenon. It is worthwhile to mention here that for most assertions made below, numerous counter examples and

alternate hypothesis can be produced. These are strictly attempts at tracing the essentials rather than getting

3

bogged down with a speciﬁc instance. However, any study requires forming a conceptual framework based on the

more common observations, yet being highly attuned to any speciﬁcs that can stray from the usual. Also, for the

sake of brevity, a number of ﬁner points have been omitted and certain simplifying assumptions have been made.

Given the scope and complications of the below discussion, drawbacks are hard to avoid and future iterations will

seek to address these as they are discovered.

3 The Four Pronged Approach

3.1 The Uncertainty Principle of the Social Sciences

Kashyap (2014a, 2014b) discuss the uncertainty principle of the social sciences, though parts of the discussion

are generic, the greater portion centers around, the themes of investing and ﬁnancial services, paving the way for

this present work to consider a broader setting.

Conjecture 3. The Uncertainty Principle of the Social Sciences can be stated as, “Any generalization

in the social sciences cannot be both popular and continue to yield predictions, or in other words,

the more popular a particular generalization, the less accurate will be the predictions it yields”.

This is because as soon as any generalization and its set of conditions becomes common knowledge, the entry

of many participants shifts the equilibrium or the dynamics, such that the generalization no longer applies to the

known set of conditions. An observation is likely to be more popular when there are more people comprising that

system; and it is important to try and explicitly understand, where possible, how predictions can go awry. Every

social system then operates under the overarching reach of this principle.

3.2 The Objectives of a Social System or the Responsibilities of the Players

The ultimate objective of any social system is to maximize well-being. To determine what is intrinsic to well-

being, requires acknowledging its subjectivity. Layard (2010) talks about surveys in the United States that showed

no increase in happiness over the past 60 years, reﬂecting the fact that higher national income has not brought the

better quality of life that many expected. The science of subjective well-being is young, but it is developed enough

to know that we need to collect data and make it a prime objective to quantitatively study the determinants of

well-being, so that it can be used in policy analysis.

4

Conjecture 4. Poverty is a state of mind.

It is important to gain a more profound, comprehension of welfare and delineate its components into those

that result from an increase in goods and services, and hence can be attributed to economic growth, and into

those that are not related to economic growth but lead to a better quality of life. The reasoning here being that

economic growth alone is an inadequate indicator of well-being. Hand in hand with a better understanding of the

characteristics of welfare, comes the need to consider the measures or metrics we currently have that gauge economic

growth and supplement those with factors that capture well-being more holistically. This is important because,

there would be little sense in pursuing policies aimed at increasing some widely used metric like Gross Domestic

Product, GDP, if such policies do not lead to an increase in welfare and worse still, if they lead to an unintentional

decrease in well-being; on a lighter note, it is worth pondering about which meaning of gross is applicable in the

context of GDP.

There is a compelling case for constructing better metrics to measure welfare. Stiglitz, Sen & Fitoussi (2009)

highlighted the deﬁciencies in existing metrics, encapsulated an agenda for improvements, and discussed key areas

on which further research is needed. An alternative to GDP can use variables that show the increase in essentials

like food, health care, education, real estate prices, and disposable income. We need metrics that capture not just

the increase, but measure the distribution of consumption goods and supplement those with ways that gauge how

quality of life improves. A proxy for quality of life can be captured with variables for: environmental factors relating

to air, water, noise pollution; leisure time per day; vacation time; personal safety against crimes and conﬂicts; social

factors like availability of support in case of need; freedom to express oneself and political participation; political

stability; and lastly, sustainable ways of production, or having a sustainability index based on depletion of natural

resources, which boils down to making sure that what we produce today can continue to be produced with minimal

impact to the environment and being able to maintain the current level of well-being for future generations.

Conjecture 5. The question of what is absolutely imperative to lead a good life is a constantly chang-

ing one, as luxuries end up becoming necessities.

This tells us that there can be no absolute measure of well-being. We need to be mindful of the limitations of any

static measure and include variables that capture the change in our consumption habits over the years, especially

across the constituents of any welfare measure. As we look to analyze the objectives of a social system, we should

look beyond measures of how this system contributes to the GDP, but also consider other variables that provide a

more complete picture of how this system contributes to welfare.

5

Social systems can be broadly categorized into those that are proﬁt seeking, we shall refer to them as businesses,

and the others that are eleemosynary. We consider the case of the business or the proﬁt-seeking corporation.

Friedman (1970) suggests that the social responsibility of business is to increase proﬁts. Recognizing that attributing

objectives to any social system is a vague concept, it becomes important to ask precisely, what this implies for

whom. The discussion then moves on to the responsibilities of corporate executives, who are expected to make

proﬁt maximizing decisions while conforming to the rules of society, embodied in law and ethical custom and stay

within the rules of the game. In order to fulﬁll such an expectation,

Conjecture 6. It is implicitly assumed that the corporate executive is a philosopher king, a concept

dating back to Plato (The republic of Plato), wise enough to know what is right, with the authority

to enforce it and the self-control to not abuse his power.

There is an additional assumption here that the shareholders, whose agent is the executive, are capable of

selecting the right person, of monitoring his behavior and taking corrective measures. Surely, that is a tall order in

the complex business environment that is today.

The issue of corporate governance is worth a closer look. Shleifer & Vishny (1997) argue that legal protection

of investor rights is one essential element of corporate governance. Concentrated ownership, through large share

holdings, takeovers, and bank ﬁnance, is also a nearly universal method of control that helps investors inﬂuence, ﬁrm

decision making. Although large investors can be eﬀective in solving the agency problem, they may also ineﬃciently

redistribute wealth from other investors to themselves.

Any talk about legal matters is incomplete without a mention of Bastiat’s (1968) timeless essay, The Law, which

suggests the precise limits under which the law has to operate; otherwise, the result would be legalized plunder.

The main purpose of law is to render justice, Sandel (2010), illustrates the subjectivity and the subtleties that can

arise when dispensing justice.

Conjecture 7. Even if we take it for granted that the business of a business is simply making more

money, and skip the entire debate of whether a ﬁrm (and hence the individuals comprising the ﬁrm)

should identify itself with a more purposeful aspiration, what we can see is that with increasing

complexity, it becomes harder to verify whether the goals of the individuals are aligned towards the

common objective.

Grant (1996) identiﬁes the primary role of the ﬁrm as integrating the specialist knowledge resident in individuals,

6

into goods and services. The task of coordination, which can be onerous and the possibility of goal conﬂict

are mentioned. The knowledge-based approach oﬀers a theoretical basis for understanding recent organizational

trends, including the development of new organizations forms which are more horizontal, with fewer layers, greater

empowerment, more team based structures and inter-ﬁrm alliances. If the primary resource of the ﬁrm is knowledge,

if knowledge is owned and can only be exercised by employees, the foundations of a shareholder value approach, with

distinct owner and operator, are challenged. This analysis fails to account for is a more comprehensive approach

embracing both knowledge creation and application. Also, in larger settings, a specialist centric view could lead to

situations, where people successfully try and portray a false image using titles, appearance, and other methods of

superﬁcial perceptions reliant signaling (Kashyap 2010).

Carroll (1991) takes a starkly contrasting view and lists the many social responsibilities of ﬁrms in their decreasing

order of importance: economic, legal, ethical and philanthropic. He mentions that for such a reality to happen ﬁrm

executives need to be moral instead of amoral or immoral, which is again a hark back at the need for philosopher

kings. Friedman suggests that if shareholder value is maximized, then the shareholders can heed to the call of

non-proﬁt generating responsibilities, with their share of the proﬁts. It is easy to see that the common ground for

both viewpoints is to have shareholders more involved with ﬁrm decisions, which can happen better in smaller,

employee owned and operated ﬁrms.

Anderson & Warkov (1961) summarize ﬁndings from previous studies that assert that growing density of pop-

ulation in a society results in increasingly complex forms of organization and that an increase of size necessitates

more complex forms of communication. Some studies claim that, in addition to its eﬀect on organizational com-

plexity growth also brings about a disproportionate increase in the size of the administrative component. Finally,

more and more complex tasks may require that the coordination of an organization’s diﬀerentiated components be

accomplished by an increasingly larger administration. By studying the size, complexity and related characteristics

of hospitals, they ﬁnd that: the relative size of the administrative component decreases as the number of persons

performing identical tasks in the same place increases (in sharp contrast to other previous studies); the relative size

of the administrative component increases as the number of places at which work is performed increases; the relative

size of the administrative component increases as the number of tasks performed at the same place increases (or as

roles become increasingly specialized and diﬀerentiated).

Hall, Johnson & Haas (1967) ﬁnd that the relationships between size and other structural components are

inconsistent, similar to previous research, which utilized size as a major variable. They review other studies that

consider the centrality of complexity within organization. Large size is not in itself a critical characteristic of

organizations. Rather what appears to be important here is complexity, which is often indicated by size but is

quite distinct from it. One way of ascertaining complexity is by measuring the number of occupational specialties

and the length of training required by each. The greater the number of occupations and the longer the period of

7

training required, the more complex the organization. With increased size, the structure of the organization becomes

much more complex. The division of labor becomes more diﬀerentiated and specialized; more levels of supervision

are introduced to maintain coordination and control; and more people become involved in organizational planning.

There are wide variations in complexity and it is a structural condition which itself contains a number of components.

Another deﬁnition of complexity, which appears to encompass the considerations discussed above, is the degree of

internal segmentation, that is, the number of separate "parts" of the organization as reﬂected by the division of

labor, number of hierarchical levels, and the spatial dispersion of the organization. There is a slight tendency for

larger organizations to be both more complex and more formalized. More hierarchical levels are found in larger

organizations and relatively strong relationships exist between size and the formalization of the authority structure.

Their research, which included organizations ranging in size from six members to over 9,000 members, representing

a wide range of types, such as educational, commercial, military, governmental, manufacturing, religious, and penal

organizations, suggests that size may be rather irrelevant as a factor in determining organizational structure.

Kasarda (1974) examines the structural implications of social system size on three levels of the social system

hierarchy: the institutional, the communal, and the societal. He ﬁnds that size has a pervasive inﬂuence on the

internal organization of social systems. Size promotes greater administrative intensity in institutions, communities,

and industrialized societies. As social systems expand, substantially greater proportions of their personnel are

devoted to communicative or clerical functions. Another inference which may be drawn is that large size promotes an

increase in the proportion of professional and technical specialists to handle the additional problems of information

gathering, evaluation and planning. Large size does reduce the proportion of managers in an organization; but

it raises the relative proportion of other administrative personnel. The result is that the marginal savings in

management overhead are exceeded by the marginal costs (in terms of man power) of larger clerical and professional

staﬀs.

Rizzo, House & Lirtzman (1970) ﬁnd that measures of role ambiguity and conﬂict within organizations can exist

as two separate and independent dimensions, with some correlation in expected directions with other variables of

importance to organizations.

Despite the number of interesting studies that have been carried out, it seems to indicate that the results are

inconclusive, which is not surprising, given the complexities involved in the study of social systems. These studies

can be thought of adding to two viewpoints: one is that with larger systems, complexity increases and a greater

proportion of people are necessary to co-ordinate and ensure that the objectives are aligned; the other being that

the administrative component does not necessarily increase in proportion to size. The main issue with both these

contrasting viewpoints is that the span of control or the sphere of inﬂuence of certain people will enlarge and this

mushrooming clout can be misused and even if it is not, inadvertent mistakes can have staggering consequences.

8

Conjecture 8. It is worth considering whether the complexities of larger systems might itself render

such systems beyond the reach of proper analysis and whether the social systems will evolve and

change as studies emerge suggesting a particular ﬁnding.

That the uncertainties involved are manifold and they multiply as systems grow is probably the only thing we

can be certain about. In the absence of a situation where all the individuals in a social system are righteous, capable

of divining the right information and making perfect decisions, it becomes necessary to have smaller organizations,

with reduced scope in what they control, so that the eﬀects of mistakes or behavior deviating away from the goals,

tends to be restricted.

3.2.1 High Energy Low IQ Syndrome

Conjecture 9. The wider the set of responsibilities a person faces, the lesser the attention each

particular facet gets.

As an organization gets larger, it is reasonable to assume that more issues will crop up that require resolution

by its most capable members. For simpliﬁcation, here we can assume that capability means depth of thinking that

considers an array of possibilities before a decision is made, something that a philosopher King would be suited to

do, as we alluded to earlier. We also emphasize that IQ here does not necessarily reﬂect innate intelligence but is

more about the attention span one devotes to solving problems (hence the amount of intelligent thought process).

Assuming then that the most capable members are at the top levels, where the key decisions are made, we see that

the amount of thought each issue gets will be limited since many issues are bubbling up to the surface. We then see

that decision makers need to develop an ability to shuttle between diﬀerent demands, which by deﬁnition is lower

IQ.

This leads to the contradiction that the members of the organization that persist in deeply analyzing issues

and setting the more appropriate direction forward do not reach the higher levels since they are not displaying the

energy or the capacity to multi task among a myriad of concerns. The people that end up at the top would be those

that can make superﬁcial, a.k.a quick and dirty, decisions. Situations that are more prone to conﬂict are discussed

later highlighting that sub optimal decisions can be good enough in some cases, as long as their impact is curtailed.

Needless to say, this discussion overlooks many things to convey the message that the margin for tolerance is high

for most day to day situations, where quick heuristic decisions would be perfectly ﬁne. The incidents that can

diﬀerentiate good and great decision making are far and few between. But if such situations do arise, with the ever

9

growing size of ﬁrms, it is likely that the best decisions makers are not acting on it.

There is the possibility that high energy decision makers rely on high IQ lieutenants for advice. Even after

assuming no loss of information or dilution of directives across layers, no conﬂict of outcomes and hidden agendas

(all three are more likely in more complex conﬂicting environments), various constraints related to chain of command

and ﬁnal authority set in and if diﬀering perspectives exist, it is likely that high energy low IQ decisions might

prevail.

3.3 The Need for Smaller Organizations

Diamond (1997) tracing the historical development of the trend towards bigger organizations, supported by

bigger communities, leads us to the key stimulus that was the surplus generated by the superior modes of agricultural

production. This made possible the establishment of a non-producing class, whose members were crucial for the

rapid development of writing, science, cities, technology-based military prowess and formation of states. Dense

population centers that could be supported near these lush agricultural centers had a greater exchange of ideas,

bringing new innovations into force and also allowing the extraction of rents from a larger number of individuals

who came to depend on these new products that were fed by the invention spree.

The blessings of large population centers, on the sciences and the arts, have been tremendous. Development of

regions like Silicon Valley in California or Broadway in New York is due to the rapid exchange of ideas. While the

beneﬁts of dense populations accrue up to a certain point, the negatives of overcrowding, shortage of resources and

diminishing returns set in after a certain stage, giving rise to increasing disparities between the residents in these

packed colonies. The widespread use of technology to connect people facilitates interaction among relatively far

ﬂung dwellings, removing the need for the congregation of individuals to accelerate the pace of evolution of human

civilization.

Damanpour (1996) considers the relationship between innovation and two major indicators of organizational

complexity-structural complexity and organizational size. The study ﬁnds that the association between structural

complexity and innovation depends upon operational deﬁnition of complexity, environmental uncertainty, use of

manufacturing organizations, use of service organizations, focus on technical innovations, focus on product innova-

tions, and focus on implementation of innovation; and the association between organizational size and innovation

depends upon operational deﬁnition of size, environmental uncertainty, use of service organizations, use of for-proﬁt

organizations, focus on technical innovations, and focus on product innovations.

Busenitz & Barney (1997) examine the diﬀerences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations

with respect to two biases and heuristics: overconﬁdence (overestimating the probability of being right) and rep-

10

resentativeness (the tendency to overgeneralize from a few characteristics or observations). Entrepreneurs and

managers think diﬀerently, behave diﬀerently and utilize heuristics and basis to diﬀerent degrees.

If the use of

biases and heuristics are stable over time, then those who are uncomfortable with heuristic based decision-making,

on more occasions, will be attracted and selected into larger organizations and vice versa.

Under conditions of environmental uncertainty and complexity, biases and heuristics can be an eﬀective and

eﬃcient guide to decision-making. The counter intuitive message here is that larger organizations can give rise to

complexity and might in fact require a heuristic approach and be ill-equipped to handle circumstances that require

decision making shortcuts, due to the more status-quo loving or risk averse nature of its managers. Whereas the

use of cognitive biases may be beneﬁcial and required in some circumstances, it can lead to severe and systematic

errors in others.

The implication of this is that large organizations are generally more stable than smaller ones; but the price

of failure is greater and hence they are suitable, or perhaps, are more tolerable, only for stable environments and

certain areas of society. If entrepreneurial attitudes and risk taking abound in organizations that can negatively

impact the lives of people, it is better to ensure that they are contained in the harm they can do.

Conjecture 10. Highlighting the greater damage that can result when things go wrong with large

systems might seem like a negative threat based approach. The rationale here is that for normal

functioning, either small or large can be eﬀective and adequate enough; but when the unexpected

happens, the results are more severe and widespread with larger systems.

Starting with the premise that proﬁt maximization is the driving force of a business, means accepting that a busi-

ness requires the division of a ﬁnite amount of wealth among its participants, a situation inherent with possibilities

for conﬂict. This suggests that it would be prudent to restrict the scope of organizations that require allocation of

resources, for which agents do not necessarily have limited desirability (alternately stated as, diminishing marginal

utilities won’t set in till a very high threshold is reached). Comparing large universities and large businesses should

provide more clarity. A business needs to create wealth and share that among its employees. A university needs

to create knowledge, which is easier to share than wealth. This leads to the conclusion that universities can be big

without giving rise to undue conﬂicts while businesses need to be smaller.

Porta, Rafael La, et al (1996) argue that trust is an important ingredient to ensure co-operative behavior. They

further mention that while trust might be easier to establish in smaller settings where repeated games can be played

that present opportunities to seek corrective actions for previous wrongs, even in larger societies with a greater level

of trust, co-operative outcomes can be observed. What this tells us that all else being equal, a smaller setting is

11

better for coordinating eﬀorts.

Smaller size means that it would be easier to check, what, is being done by the institutions and the people

involved. We need to look at the argument that if organizations are small, there would be many such institutions

and hence many of them to monitor, making it a harder task. But given the reduced scope of smaller organizations,

there would be greater transparency, less complexity and a stronger relationship between the service provider and

the served.

Conjecture 11. The smaller size leads to more number of superior quality interactions between the

same parties, leading to a repeated game setting, which is known to produce more co-operative

behavior. The strengthened relationship eﬀectively acts as an enforcement agent towards both the

parties.

The smaller institution cannot extract large rents for itself, since otherwise it would cease to be competitive

against the myriad number of smaller institutions that are available as alternatives and such actions would deter

people from doing business with it. The people that are beneﬁting from the services of an institution would be

under close scrutiny from the institution, which bears the burden to ensure that its services are put to the best

use possible, since that is integral for its own prosperity. Agents are driven against myopic self-motivated behavior,

since maximal beneﬁts accrue by acting with a longer-term vision.

Conjecture 12. Any set up where the players involved have a fundamental incentive to be on best

behavior, functions better than other alternate possibilities. Smaller size reduces complexity in many

ways and makes it harder to hide things under the rug.

This also makes it harder for corruption or other illegal episodes to happen. Systemic failures, wherein most or-

ganizations in a sector, are severely aﬀected in a negative way, are less likely, since we have many small organizations

and the degree of interconnectedness will be lower that in a set up with a fewer number of organizations.

As organizations grow bigger, a greater share of the individuals that are part of it, become involved in just

making sure that the organizations are running smoothly. This takes people away from becoming involved with the

actual generation of ideas or producing a tangible output or adding to real growth and welfare. Instead of excessive

resource allocation to ensure co-ordination and control, we simply need more transparency, which will result in more

fairness and the right thing being done. Honesty is not entirely innate; it can be instilled and it follows from the

recognition that human conduct is usually a response to the incentives and the situations. While, formal attempts

12

at tracing the impact of integrity on the functioning of large institutions are worthwhile; a simpler argument, that

smaller organizations with less complexity create a better alignment of incentives and situations, and give rise to

an environment where it is harder to hide immoral incidents, and foster more righteous behavior, can be shown to

hold water.

We could raise the point that the compensation of executives in large organizations can be monitored and going

this route would be easier than having to monitor thousands of smaller ﬁrms. The rebuttal for this would be that

when someone has access to large amounts of money, the chances of misappropriation are higher than when there

is no access to large amounts. The recent ﬁnancial crisis had instances where large bonuses were paid out even by

ﬁrms that were receiving bail out funds from the government, under the excuse of retaining talent, among others.

While it is not entirely inappropriate to impose limits on executive compensations, it is highly likely that clever

ways to derive excessive compensation will be devised when there is possibility of being able to siphon large amounts

of money. This also raises the question of the system of governance. Simply put, this is about whether the state

should interfere with the speciﬁc of how a ﬁrm is run or should the state restrict the main activities of a ﬁrm. The

next section also considers this in further detail, but without deviating much further from our discussion, we can

say that giving the state power over every day aﬀairs can be disastrous.

Conjecture 13. Does size matter? Does large size lead to stability? Turning to nature again for inspiration,

we don’t see excessively large organisms, despite some creatures that never stop growing. Similarly, organizations

have a tendency to grow. We are a growth obsessed society. A mindset that tolerates the omnipresent stressor

of competition and celebrates the birth and death of organizations, helps prevent abnormal growth. The pseudo-

stability of big organizations can cause disasters when they fail, since most systems can cope better with many small

continuous demises than a few large sudden deaths. Size does matter.

There is also the possibility of bigger organizations hiding ineﬃcient parts within themselves by subsidizing

their existence. The argument about economies of scale is not as applicable today, because, we use automation and

machines to a great extent for agriculture and producing goods. Organizations are knowledge based as opposed to

the traditional manufacturing industry, for which such a production term needs to be applied. If organizations are

to be small, it is helpful to have a climate that facilitates entrepreneurial activity and allows the easy birth and

growth of new businesses.

Acs and Varga (2004) highlight two important proxy measures of the existence of entrepreneurial opportunity,

the tendency of people to engage in self- employment and the tendency of people to start new ﬁrms. Using data

from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) project they examine the relationship between entrepreneurship,

13

knowledge spillovers and economic growth. There are manifold ways to measure entrepreneurial activity. One

overbearing dissimilitude is between opportunity-based entrepreneurial activity and necessity-based entrepreneurial

activity. Opportunity entrepreneurship represents the voluntary nature of participation and necessity reﬂecting the

individual’s perception that such actions presented the best option available for employment, but not necessarily

the preferred option. Opportunity entrepreneurship diﬀers from necessity by sector of industry and with respect

to growth aspirations. Opportunity entrepreneurs expect their ventures to produce more high growth ﬁrms and

provide more new jobs. Any gauge of entrepreneurial activity needs to factor in this distinction.

Bockstette, Chanda and Putterman (2002) construct an index that captures the length of state experience. This

index is higher for countries that have a longer experience with state-level institutions and such countries have

higher political stability, institutional quality and economic growth. It would be advisable to supplement the level

of entrepreneurial activity with a measure that captures the depth and history of entrepreneurial culture present in

a country.

Beck & Demirguc-Kunt (2006) ﬁnd that small ﬁrms face larger growth constraints and have less access to formal

sources of external ﬁnance, potentially explaining the lack of their contribution to growth. This highlights the issue

that larger organizations could crowd out smaller ones, since the pseudo-stability they display, will guzzle away

resources from smaller organizations.

Kashyap (2015) looks at the ﬁnancial services sector and ways in which the increasing size of ﬁnancial systems

leads to greater proﬁts for the sector at the cost of stability and even perhaps a deviation from the core functions of

the sector. While there are numerous ways to monitor and overcome this departure from the intended objectives,

a self-reinforcing way that reduces complexity is decreasing the size of ﬁnancial ﬁrms.

Linck, Netter, & Yang (2009) argue that the requirements of the Sarbanes Oxley act have increased the demand

and reduce the supply of directors, and there is a potential adverse impact on smaller public ﬁrms due to increased

compensation burden. The increased monitoring burden imposed upon organizations is working to the detriment

of smaller organizations, which might need lesser surveillance than their larger counterparts.

Acs and Varga (2002) hypothesize that any spatialized theory of technology led regional economic growth needs

to reﬂect three fundamental issues. First, it should provide an explanation of why knowledge related economic

activities start concentrating in certain regions leaving others relatively underdeveloped; second, it needs to answer

the questions of how technological advances occur and what the key processes and institutions involved are; and

third, it has to present an analytical framework in which the role of technological change in regional economic

growth is clearly explained.

Beck (2008) mentions that bank size is positively correlated with complexity so that large banks are harder to

monitor than small banks. De-Nicolo (2000) argues that bank consolidation is likely to result in an average increase

in banks insolvency risk.

14

This prong is the most important of the four since if we get this right, the reduced size and complexity of

any organization or system; helps realize the limitations and aids in the detection of any deviations from the

expectations; ensures that the responsibilities and incentives of the parties involved are aligned and continue to

stay aligned with the original targets; and makes it easier to ascertain the unintended consequences of any eﬀorts,

which are hard to completely eliminate, as we will see in the next section.

3.3.1 Organizations as an Amalgamation of Lego(3) Blocks

Conjecture 14. We are building increasingly complex organizations and we are using increasingly

complex methodologies to study them. The complex methodologies are just rearrangements of simpler

rules just as complex organizations are aggregations of simpler blocks.

This suggests that the smaller the bunch of Lego blocks used, the easier will it be to understand any structure

that results from combining them.

3.4 Redirecting Unintended Outcomes

Paiche and Sterman (1992) inquire into decision making in complex environments and conduct an experiment

where subjects must manage a new product from launch through maturity, and make pricing and capacity decisions.

Building upon previous studies, they demonstrate that decision making in complex dynamic environments tends

to be ﬂawed in speciﬁc ways by not accounting suﬃciently for feedback loops, time delays and nonlinearities.

Even with a decent amount of experience, there is no evidence that environments with high feedback complexity

can produce improved decision making ability. Poor decision making in complex production systems can create

pervasive booms and busts, where new products can have exponential sales increases, fueling rapid growth, often

leading to overcapacity, price wars, and bankruptcy.

Pollay (1986) reviews theories about advertising’s social and cultural consequences. Advertising is viewed as

intrusive and environmental and its eﬀects as inescapable and profound. Advertising is seen as reinforcing material-

ism, cynicism, irrationality, selﬁshness, anxiety, social competitiveness, sexual preoccupation, powerlessness, and/or

a loss of self-respect.

Kashyap (2015b, 2015c) looks at unintended consequences as it applies to the ﬁnancial services industry and

the diﬃculties in being able to anticipate the outcomes of complex systems.

Norton (2002) mentions the law of unintended consequences, as often cited but rarely deﬁned, as actions of

15

people -and especially of government- always have eﬀects that are unanticipated or unintended. Building on the

work of others, primarily, Merton (1936), the discussion labels various sources of such unintended consequences:

ignorance, error, instances where individuals want the intended consequences so badly they choose to ignore any

unintended eﬀects and self-defeating predictions where the public prediction of a social development proves false

precisely because the prediction changes the course of history. Government attempts at reform have the largest

scope and hence perhaps the actions of the government and politicians are alluded to directly in the article.

Ash, Berg & Coiera (2004) outline a number of issues within a framework describing two major kinds of silent

errors caused by health care information systems: those related to entering and retrieving information and those

related to communication and coordination. The potential causes of these errors are subtle but insidious. They

argue that many of these errors are the result of highly speciﬁc failures in patient care information system design

and/or implementation. They do not focus on errors that are the result of faulty programming or other technical

dysfunctions. Hardware problems and software bugs are more common than they should be, especially in a high-

risk ﬁeld such as medicine. However, these problems are well known and can theoretically be dealt with thorough

testing before implementation. Similarly, they do not discuss errors that are the result of obvious individual or

organizational dysfunctioning such as a physician refusing to seek information in the computer system, ‘because

that is not his task, or a health care delivery organization cutting training programs for a new information system

for budgetary reasons. They focus on those often latent or silent errors that are the result of a mismatch between

the functioning of the information system and the real-life demands of health care work. Such errors are not easily

found by a technical analysis of the system design, or even suspected after the ﬁrst encounter with the system in

use. They can only emerge when the technical system is embedded into a working organization and can vary from

one organization to the next.

Schoorman (1988) examines the tendency of supervisors to escalate their commitment of a previously expressed

opinion by biasing performance ratings in the context of a real organization. There was strong support in the

study for two hypotheses: (a) that supervisors who participate in a hiring or promotion decision and agree with

the eventual decision would positively bias subsequent performance appraisal ratings for that employee; and (b)

that supervisors who participate in the original decision but disagree with the decision would bias subsequent

performance appraisal ratings in a negative direction.

Cornelius (2001) assesses the eﬃcacy of the strategy of immigration control implemented by the US government

since 1993 in reducing illegal entry attempts, and documents some of the unintended consequences of this strategy,

especially a sharp increase in mortality among unauthorized migrants along certain segments of the Mexico-US

border. The available data suggest that the current strategy of border enforcement has resulted in re-channeling

ﬂows of unauthorized migrants to more hazardous areas, raising fees charged by people-smugglers, and discouraging

unauthorized migrants already in the US from returning to their places of origin. However, there is no evidence

16

that the strategy is deterring or preventing signiﬁcant numbers of new illegal entries, particularly given the absence

of a serious eﬀort to curtail employment of unauthorized migrants through work-site enforcement.

The Sweeney and Sweeney (1977) anecdote about the Capitol Hill baby-sitting crisis exposits the mechanics

of inﬂation, setting interest rates and monetary policies required to police the optimum amount of money. The

creation of a monetary crisis in a small simple environment of good hearted people expounds that even with near

ideal conditions, things can become messy; then in a large labyrinthine atmosphere, disaster could be brewing

without getting noticed and can strike without much premonition. This emphasizes the need to keep complexity at

bay and establishing an ambience where repeated games can be played with public transparency, so that guileful

practices can be curtailed.

All of this tells us that intended outcomes could churn out negative side eﬀects and the reverse could happen

as well. But to create a robust society we need to minimize the impact of the downfall. The topic discussed earlier

about having better metrics to measure welfare would be helpful to identity unintended outcomes.

If governments or any organizations start intervening to set strict limits on production, on the amount and

manner in which people consume and live, the results could be catastrophic and lead to too much state control

or to socialism or even communism. (Hayek 2009; Marx, Engels 1959; are seminal works). The other extreme to

this is completely free markets, or capitalism, which as we are realizing will lead to huge inequalities in society.

While it is hard to draw a strict line between these two modes of governance, we need elements from both models

of governance and economic policy. Our earlier discussion on the advantages of smaller size ﬁrms applies here,

wherein, with the prevalence of smaller organizations, incentives would be aligned such that it becomes easier to

spot wrongful conduct, leading to better governance with lesser monitoring.

4 Discussion

4.1 Small Business as a Solution to Corruption.

When power and wealth are concentrated in the hands of a few, it usually leads to corruption and exploitation

of the masses by a few. This is inevitable and follows from human nature and the seductive allure of power. While

taming human nature is possible, let us leave that out for now since it is a somewhat arduous task that could span

generations.

Every attempt at social reform has been to address this issue. This exploitation of the masses by a few happens,

in the extreme case, even with both the two leading models of society and governance namely, Socialism and

Capitalism. A more practical and immediate solution lies in ensuring that the basic needs of any individual are

met and he/she has a safety net that ensures a certain minimal standard of living. When survival becomes easy,

17

people will not give in easily to exploitation. This can happen through a grassroots movement by ensuring that

small businesses and mid-size businesses thrive and the barriers to entry for such new organizations in an economy

are minimal to non-existent.

When many such small organizations succeed and new ones can crop up easily, power tends to get less con-

centrated and therein lies the true solution to the many ills faced by any society. Having said this, we do not

mean that we should not say anything against corruption or other ills. In fact, any eﬀort by any individual against

corruption or the like should be commended and any such eﬀort is certainly not in vain. But what we really need

to understand is that we need to support organizations that help small businesses grow and thrive. This is what

the Great Mahatma Gandhi also stressed in his vision of every village meeting its needs indigenously through small

scale industry. This can apply to all countries around the globe even though there are varying levels of corruption

and other cultural nuances.

A simple analogy is when a person is very sick, medicines help, but what is needed longer term are better diet,

exercise and living conditions. Same goes with creating more rules and protests, they are helpful temporarily but

what is needed longer term is an environment where individuals can establish self-suﬃciency easily thereby reducing

the chance for them to get exploited. When this happens, the common man is less dependent on the Government

and other large organizations, such organizations will have less power making it more diﬃcult to be corrupt or

abusive.

Surely, this perfect recipe for a smooth functioning society is easier said than done. Most would easily see that

the simpliﬁcation in this narrative is for the brevity that is essential in any call for action, which in this case, is for

individuals and organizations to realize the need to promote small and medium enterprises, their responsibility in

making this happen and the beneﬁts that will accrue to them once this starts happening. As with any daunting

challenge, there will be opposition from certain incumbents that stand to lose the most with the added risk that

success might seem completely elusive or become available in small unsatisfying doses for a long time, there is

simply no excuse for not trying.

While this might seem like an attempt to change the world, it is sheer arrogance, possibly bordering stupidity,

to think we can change the world that has existed for millions if not billions of years in our blink of a lifetime. The

simple belief espoused here is that promoting small-biz is one way to make life in a society a fun ride for a lot of

people. The other option might, of course, be to resurrect the psychedelic 60’s, the hippie lifestyle and the blissful

ignorance of LSD, all of which is neither recommended nor disapproved.

4.2 The Existential Question!!!

Why do we need organizations that aid the development of smaller organizations and businesses?

18

The one sentence that can answer this question is,

Conjecture 15. "Necessity is the mother of all creation, but the father that is often forgotten is

frustration. . . "

It is necessary for organizations, which are seeking to help small businesses ﬂourish, to exist. The earlier

section on ‘Small-Biz as a Solution to Corruption’ has a more detailed explanation of this necessity. While that

is the necessary part, the frustration that should bring about such organizations is the increasing explosion of

information, jargon and the deception of society by the so-called experts. We mean no disrespect to any experts

who have spent many years working in a ﬁeld. We deﬁnitely include people doing Research and Development in the

expert category. We as a society, clearly need both. There is also much to be said about the instincts that people

tend to develop when they engage in a certain behavior for long periods of time. But, what we need to realize is

that in most situations that do not warrant a highly specialized outlook, we value expert opinions a lot more, even

though they may not really be all that better than the opinions of an average person.

It is common to fear darkness and look towards the light and hence the nexus to Diwali, the festival of lights,

as illuminated by the following metaphor. As we celebrate the festival of lights, it is worth pondering about one

interpretation of light, which stands for knowledge that dispels darkness, which is representative of both ignorance

and over conﬁdence.

Needless to say, we need to mitigate this two-sided problem, where on one side we know nothing of too many

things and on the other side, we feel we know everything about some other things, by spreading knowledge about

varied concepts and by demonstrating the limitations of whatever we know.

Summing it up, we need organizations to promote small businesses and continuously educate people. This relates

to the earlier discussion of the central functions of organizations, which is the creation and application of knowledge

to solve the problems facing society. While it is hard to draw a strict boundary between the two streams, gaining

knowledge can represent eﬀorts at creating and disseminating interesting thoughts, and problem solving could be

the work done with small businesses in resolving their concerns.

In Conclusion, Organizations like the one above need to exist, in this information age, to try to

uncover nuggets of knowledge amidst buckets of B.S.(1)

4.3 A Way of Life

Why stop at the organization level, when a culture that is constantly involved in gaining knowledge and applying

19

this knowledge to solving problems can be a beneﬁcial lifestyle. Gaining knowledge and solving problems need not

be a trade, but it can simply be something people enjoy doing; leading to the motto, Not just a business, but

a way of life.

What other values would be compatible with such a tradition? Such a heritage would challenge conventional

thinking by claiming that most complexity is the result of viewing the world from a highly specialized point of view

and the increased use of unnecessary jargon. It would continuously strive to ﬁnd common elements among various

seemingly unrelated disciplines. This would be done, while being fully aware that all situations have certain unique

elements to them and that recognizing this is the key to arriving at a more comprehensive resolution of problems.

Years of experience are not useless. Previous experience can be extremely valuable, but only when used where it

is really needed. Respect for every bit of knowledge gained from every possible source is important; what is more

important is an attitude that does not take this knowledge too seriously. This would mean gaining knowledge, so

we can forget all about it when we have to and recollecting knowledge from a myriad of sources when we want to.

If this sounds confusing, congratulations, this is the right track; confusion is the beginning of understanding.

This lifestyle would seek to help all kinds of organizations by advocating a somewhat unique approach to problem

solving. When organizations realize they are facing some issues, they look for people either internally or externally

who can solve it.

Conjecture 16. A lot of times, the main issue about the issue is that it is not clear what the real

issue is.

The reason for this is very simple, when an issue is identiﬁed, it is either done by someone who does not have

the time to solve it or does not know how to solve it or simply does not want to deal with it themselves. This could

very well be due to the many valid constraints they face in their current organization. So they make their best

eﬀort to isolate the issue. Then, what is usually done is the issue is bucketed into a few standard categories. Then

an expert in that category is brought in to take care of it. The expert here is someone who has dealt with similar

issues many times before and has experience dealing with such problems for a number of years.

Conjecture 17. So at this point, we are not sure what the issue is and we have an expert on this

issue looking at it.

When we talk about experience over a number of years in the conventional sense, it does lead to expertise and

specialization. This means when a specialist is looking at a problem, he/she is looking at it in one way, identical

20

to an approach he might have used before, and might provide a solution quite similar to previous situations that

might have some common elements to the current problem. This happens in a lot of organizations, a lot of times.

The specialist has the advantage of being the most knowledgeable person in the initial diagnosis phase and hence

someone who is not a specialist does not seem to add much value in the initial phase and the opinions of few such

non-experts get serious consideration in this initial phase. We might have seen this play out many times before in

almost any organization we have been part of. The good part is that this problem can be solved with a certain way

of problem solving.

Dealing with problems diﬀerently is an attitude, a frame of mind. We mean no disrespect to people who are

passionate about something and spend years pursuing it. But, the nature of the issue we are facing is such that, in

many situations that do not require a lot of expertise, we value the opinions of experts, even though it might not

contribute anything materially signiﬁcant. We can have a bright high school student, talk as intelligently about

the economy, as an economist, who has been doing this for two decades. The same goes with say, an expert in

marketing, accounting, law or a number of other disciplines. (While it is tempting to generalize this and say that

with the right amount of training, this applies to almost every discipline; we steer away from doing that here.)

There is also an element here about how luck is important and this can be a long discussion and we will leave it

out for now.

The takeaway from this is that people overestimate the amount of additional knowledge that expert’s possess.

The bias that forms naturally, when experience is used to solve problems, gets overlooked. Having said that:

when looking at a problem, it is not just helpful but absolutely essential, to not muddy the issue too much with

our previous experience. This does not mean that we have to leave out experts from our teams. It is certainly

important to draw lessons from previous situations, to work with many experts and solicit their advice. But in the

initial phase, we should try to get as many contrasting opinions out on the table as possible. We should also try

to ﬁnd common elements between a particular problem, and say some other problems the organization might be

facing in other related divisions or groups. Easy as this might sound, to fully get a team working like this, takes

training and a great deal of modesty from the members of the team. To be able to accomplish this requires the

right approach to problem solving and continuous honing of those skills. This way of Problem Solving provides

better satisfaction for all the stakeholders.

It is worthwhile to mention the kind of persons to keep company with, to promote this lifestyle. It would be

someone who knows not to take their experience as their greatest asset. The ﬁrst thing to learn is to be able to

drop our baggage of experience at the door step before looking at any problem. A fresh perspective and untainted

observation should form the basis of getting trained to diagnose any situation. Next, it is about learning to apply

the knowledge gained from sources as obscure as watching a clown perform, in a busy Paris street or a day spent

on an African Safari to the problem at hand. It is a constant involvement in gaining knowledge and questioning

21

what we learn. This critical evaluation of knowledge helps to ﬁnd patters that are otherwise not easily noticed. It

is more than surprising, when one discovers how things are interrelated and the subsequent "aha" moment that

comes about when we uncover these relationships. It is important to be extremely organized in our thoughts and

eﬀorts; but given what has been discussed, there is no standard life cycle or project plan that will apply and we

can follow. We need to observe and take detailed notes in this ﬁrst phase of analysis. This makes the initial phase

of any project the hardest phase.

Another example of this thinking paradigm would be, people in the operations or the inventory management

department should not just be involved but they should understand all aspects of developing new products in the

product development group. The common complaint to this is that with only 24 hours in a day, and less than half

of that devoted to work, someone in operations does not have the time to learn about new products. There is a

simple and eﬀective solution to this. When new projects are started, in the initial phase, it becomes necessary to

demonstrate how cross departmental understanding can be achieved with very minimal time consumption when the

key stake holders are incentivized to understand the importance and made to participate in such eﬀorts.

This leads to the most important aspect of how to tackle new issues - Teamwork. The central belief for team

work to work is: what one person can do, two or more people can do better. Teams need to be structured around this

belief. Individuals that have dealt with problems similar to the ones being faced need to be teamed with people with

expertise in other areas. The instincts of the expert coupled with the fresh perspective of the so called non-expert

will ensure that no stone is left unturned in looking for solutions. Being eﬀective problem solvers means taking on

diﬀerent roles from being a sounding board, to acting as coaches, to performing complete hands on implementations,

as the particular case may require. What is important is a desire to get the most things done. This approach might

pleasantly surprise everyone involved, at how much more can be accomplished than was initially thought possible.

The result is what we can term “A Fundamental & Original Approach to Problem Solving”.

Tying the discussion back to the central tenet of the paper and the arguments put forth earlier, we can surmise

that the way of life discussed here is easier to follow when organizations are smaller. Corruption will be less and

objectives of the players are aligned with the intended outcomes.

5 The Path Ahead

The core theme we have proposed is that organizations need to be small. This opens up a number of questions,

to which we provide partial answers here, and point out that much further thought and work is required to more

satisfactorily assuage these objections.

How small is too small or how big is still too big? While on the surface, not knowing the answer to this question

22

might seem like a show stopper for tangible action. As alluded to, in the introduction; a relative scale in terms of

what size works for what purpose, is what we can hope to accomplish. The four pronged analysis technique can

help reveal where size is hampering the objectives of any particular social system.

What are some ways to ensure organizations become small and stay small? How can we transform society in its

current state with large organizations to a state with smaller organizations painlessly or with minimum negative

consequences? How do we suppress the natural urge and desire we (including owners and managers of organizations)

have to grow our organizations? What are the implications of smaller size for huge multinational organizations and

the area of international trade and ﬁnance? Is there really a stability that comes from size or will the birth and

death of organizations of smaller organizations be accepted such that there will be a realization that larger size only

gives pseudo stability? This brings up the subject of regulation and the limitations of regulation, not to mention,

the unintended consequences that always creep in along with the intended ones. While not attempting to have some

regulation in place would be unwise, any attempt at regulatory change is best exempliﬁed by the story of Sergey

Bubka(2), the Russian pole vault jumper, who broke the world record 35 times. Attempts at regulatory change

can be compared to taking the bar higher. Despite all the uncertainty, we can be certain of one thing, that people

will ﬁnd some way over the intended consequences, prompting another round of rule revisions, or raising the bar,

if you will. What would work better in the long run is a cultural mindset that takes smaller size as a blessing and

worships the entrepreneurial spirit that can continuously churn out smaller organizations.

5.1 The Compensation Ratio Test

Conjecture 18. The ratio of the highest and lowest compensation levels in an organization should

not be greater than a certain factor.

As organizations age, the ratio should get smaller which incentivizes newer organizations to start up. The ratio

factor though seemingly ambiguous can be related to the amount of wealth at the disposal of the organization or

the community it is part of and the corresponding population (Kashyap 2015d). Such an approach could potentially

lead to an extreme situation where only a small percent of the population will be employed and controls most of

the resources. Another potential issue is that a temporary workforce could be used and proﬁts could be deferred

after the work force has been trimmed. This again highlights the issue that clever workarounds are always possible,

so keeping organization small and simple should be the real objective.

Tax breaks for smaller ﬁrms, breaking up big companies on antitrust grounds, greater blocks on merger activity

and other manners of enforcement can and should be employed but they will be less eﬀective since they are external

to the organization. The compensation ratio is an internal factor, constantly at work monitoring the proceedings,

23

resulting in a greater chance of success.

5.2 Final Thoughts

If organizations end up becoming small, will this aﬀect the progress we have seen in society due to the various

contributions from the arrangement and synchronization of resources and eﬀorts on a massive scale? Businesses

are needed to channel resources eﬃciently and ensure that freeloading is minimized. While conceding that the

maxim of proﬁt maximization is a necessary evil for now, the great strides that civilization has taken, lends hope

that perhaps some day agents will not require a driving force to ensure that they reach their productive best and

perhaps passion alone can propel us forward. Till we reach such a Utopian reality, we need businesses and we need

to make sure they are small.

An extreme situation that needs evaluation is whether we would be a deprived society without the large scale

alignment of eﬀorts and production. An example here, inspired by nature, is that of honey bees (Winston 1991;

Seeley 2009). To survive and get through the harsh winter, requires co-ordination from a huge number of worker

bees and a tight knit community to collect nectar from far ﬂung ﬂower sources. A handful of bees would perhaps

not function as eﬀectively, as a typical hive that can have 20,000 all the way up to 200,000 individual bees,

in protecting their homes and gathering suﬃcient food. To facilitate this high degree of co-ordination among

many individuals, bees have specialized functions determined right at the biological level complemented with a

sophisticated communication mechanism. Bhargava (1989) and Bühler (1886) discuss historical precedents where

society was grouped into divisions and speciﬁc functions were adopted by individuals in each group. Huxley (2007)

narrates an illustrative story of a utopia in a futuristic ﬁctional setting, where professions are determined right at

birth. These examples seem to highlight that unless there are rigid restrictions on roles and responsibilities, which

are enforced either biologically or made culturally prevalent, massive co-ordination might be harder to accomplish.

Modern technology has provided us with ample methods of eﬀective communication and with better means of

communication; the optimal size might also increase.

Surely it is a big ask that we solve all of society’s problems completely with one magic bullet. What we can

realistically hope as a starting point is at least a consensus as to which direction society should move towards, for

there to be better living conditions, which we can argue is the main objective of society. If we are conceptually in

agreement that small is the sensible way forward, despite what the answers to the other questions may be, we know

which way to head. If we know what needs to be done, how to do it becomes secondary since the many diﬀerent

ways to accomplish something will lead to the same ﬁnal outcome.

Given the breadth of the hypothesis, mistakes are hard to avoid, much further research and numerous revisions

will need to be made to answer, augment, modify and amplify these questions.

24

6 Conclusion

We looked at several examples that have intuitively substantiated the coherence of the four pronged approach.

By considering each prong in isolation and then ﬁnally integrating the ﬁndings, we hope to establish diﬀerent

aspects of what would be crucial to increasing welfare and also what would be the limitations of any such recom-

mendation. By recognizing the gap that exists between the fundamentals that drive the behavior of individuals or

institutions, and the expected outcomes from their actions, we hope to highlight how it becomes relatively straight

forward to set incentives that can maximize welfare.

If we start by reducing the size of institutions, it becomes easier to monitor them and a certain level of self-

governance is also put into place. The other prongs then follow somewhat naturally and where there are deviations

from what is desired, the reduced complexity, allows corrective mechanisms to be administered with less eﬀort.

Highlighting the greater damage that can result when things go wrong with large systems might seem like a

negative threat based approach. The central argument is that for normal functioning, either small or large can be

eﬀective and adequate enough; but when the unexpected happens, the results are more severe and widespread with

larger systems.

An issue speciﬁc to today’s society, corruption, was discussed. We considered why it would be useful to have

organizations that would nurture other smaller organizations. Lastly, we looked at a way of life involving a quest for

knowledge and applying it to solve problems facing society, while being cognizant of the limitations of knowledge.

Such a way of life works best when organizations are less complex.

The dynamic nature of any social science system means that the limited predictive ability of any awareness will

necessitate periodic reviews and programs then need to be prescribed in response to what is required. We certainly

hope that this work will subsequently set the stage for an investigative methodology using the four pronged approach.

7 References

1. B.S. stands for Bullshit, BS: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bullshit

2. Sergey Bubka: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergey_Bubka

3. Lego https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lego

4. Acs, Z. J., & Varga, A. (2005). Entrepreneurship, agglomeration and technological change. Small Business

Economics, 24(3), 323-334.

25

5. Acs, Z. J., & Varga, A. (2002). Geography, endogenous growth, and innovation.

International Regional

Science Review, 25(1), 132-148.

6. Anderson, T. R., & Warkov, S. (1961). Organizational size and functional complexity: a study of administra-

tion in hospitals. American Sociological Review, 23-28.

7. Ash, J. S., Berg, M., & Coiera, E. (2004). Some unintended consequences of information technology in health

care. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 11(2).

8. Bastiat, F. (1968). The law. Laissez Faire Books.

9. Beck, Thorsten. "Bank competition and ﬁnancial stability: friends or foes?." (2008).

10. Beck, Thorsten, and Asli Demirguc-Kunt. "Small and medium-size enterprises: Access to ﬁnance as a growth

constraint." Journal of Banking & Finance 30.11 (2006): 2931-2943.

11. Bhargava, D. (1989). Manu Smriti: A Sociological Analysis. Rawat Publications.

12. Bühler, G. (Ed.). (1886). The laws of Manu (Vol. 25). Clarendon Press.

13. Busenitz, L. W., & Barney, J. B. (1997). Diﬀerences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organiza-

tions: Biases & heuristics in decision-making. Journal of business venturing.

14. Carroll, A. B. (1991). The pyramid of corporate social responsibility: toward the moral management of

organizational stakeholders. Business horizons, 34(4), 39-48.

15. Cornelius, W. A. (2001). Death at the border: Eﬃcacy and unintended consequences of US immigration

control policy. Population and development review, 27(4), 661-685.

16. Damanpour, F. (1996). Organizational complexity and innovation: developing and testing multiple contin-

gency models. Management science, 42(5), 693-716.

17. De Nicolo, Gianni. "Size, charter value and risk in banking: An international perspective." EFA 2001

Barcelona Meetings. 2001.

18. Diamond, Jared M. Guns, germs, and steel. New York: Norton, 1997.

19. Friedman, M. (1970). The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Proﬁts.

20. Grant, R. M. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic management journal, 17,

109-122.

26

21. Hall, R. H., Johnson, N. J., & Haas, J. E. (1967). Organizational size, complexity, and formalization. American

Sociological Review, 903-912.

22. Hayek, F. A. (2009). The Road to Serfdom. University of Chicago Press.

23. Huxley, A. (2007). Brave new world. Ernst Klett Sprachen.

24. Kasarda, J. D. (1974). The structural implications of social system size: A three-level analysis. American

Sociological Review, 19-28.

25. Kashyap, R. (2010). Go Bald and Get Gold in Business. Working Paper.

26. Kashyap, R. (2014a). Dynamic Multi-Factor Bid–Oﬀer Adjustment Model. The Journal of Trading, 9(3),

42-55.

27. Kashyap, R. (2014b). The Circle of Investment. International Journal of Economics and Finance, Vol. 6, No.

5, 244-263.

28. Kashyap, R. (2015a). Financial Services, Economic Growth and Well-Being. Indian Journal of Finance, 9(1),

9-22.

29. Kashyap, R. (2015b). A Tale of Two Consequences. The Journal of Trading, 10(4), 51-95.

30. Kashyap, R. (2015c). Hong Kong - Shanghai Connect / Hong Kong - Beijing Disconnect (?). Working Paper.

31. Kashyap, R. (2015d). A Simple Model of Organizational Size and Complexity. Working Paper.

32. Layard, R. (2010). Measuring subjective well-being. Science, 327(5965), 534-535.

33. Linck, J. S., Netter, J. M., & Yang, T. (2009). The eﬀects and unintended consequences of the Sarbanes-Oxley

Act on the supply and demand for directors. Review of Financial Studies, 22(8).

34. Marx, K., & Engels, F. (1959). The communist manifesto (Vol. 6008). eBookEden. com.

35. Merton, R. K. (1936). The unanticipated consequences of purposive social action. American sociological

review, 1(6), 894-904.

36. Norton, R. (2002). Unintended consequences. The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics.

37. Paich, Mark, and John D. Sterman. "Boom, bust, and failures to learn in experimental markets." Management

Science 39.12 (1993): 1439-1458.

38. Plato. (1945). The republic of Plato (Vol. 30, pp. 175-203). New York: Oxford University Press.

27

39. Pollay, R. W. (1986). The distorted mirror: Reﬂections on the unintended consequences of advertising.

Journal of marketing, 50(2), 18-36.

40. Porta, R. L., Lopez-De-Silane, F., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1996). Trust in large organizations (No.

w5864). National Bureau of Economic Research.

41. Popper, Karl R. "Poverty of Historicism." (2006).

42. Putterman, Louis, Valerie Bockstette, and Areendam Chanda. "States and Markets: the Advantage of an

Early Start." (2001).

43. Rizzo, J. R., House, R. J., & Lirtzman, S. I. (1970). Role conﬂict and ambiguity in complex organizations.

Administrative science quarterly, 150-163.

44. Sandel, M. J. (2010). Justice: What’s the right thing to do?. Macmillan.

45. Schoorman, F. D. (1988). Escalation bias in performance appraisals: An unintended consequence of supervisor

participation in hiring decisions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 73(1), 58.

46. Seeley, T. D. (2009). The wisdom of the hive: the social physiology of honey bee colonies. Harvard University

Press.

47. Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1997). A survey of corporate governance. The journal of ﬁnance, 52(2),

737-783.

48. Stiglitz, J., Sen, A., & Fitoussi, J. P. (2009). The measurement of economic performance and social progress

revisited. Reﬂections and overview. Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social

Progress, Paris. Also, Commission Report (2010).

49. Sweeney, Joan, and Richard James Sweeney. "Monetary theory and the great Capitol Hill Baby Sitting Co-op

crisis: comment." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 9.1 (1977): 86-89.

50. Winston, M. L. (1991). The biology of the honey bee. Harvard University Press.

28

