Ballistic Deposition of Nanoclusters

Jeﬀrey G. Ulbrandt,1 Yang Li,1 and Randall L. Headrick1, a)
Department of Physics and Materials Science Program, University of Vermont,
Burlington VT 05405

(Dated: 22 March 2016)

Nanoporous thin-ﬁlms are an important class of materials, oﬀering a way to observe fundamental surface and
bulk processes with particles larger than individual atoms, but small enough to interact signiﬁcantly with
each other through mechanisms such as stress and surface mobility. In-Situ X-ray Reﬂectivity and Grazing
Incidence Small Angle X-Ray Scattering (GISAXS) were used to monitor thin-ﬁlms grown from Tungsten
Disilicide (WSi2) and Copper (Cu) nanoclusters. The nanoclusters ranged in size from 2 nm to 6 nm diameter
and were made by high-pressure magnetron sputtering via plasma-gas condensation. X-Ray Reﬂectivity
(XRR) measurements of the ﬁlm at various stages of growth reveal that the resulting ﬁlms exhibit very low
density, approaching 15% of bulk density. This is consistent with a simple oﬀ-lattice ballistic deposition model
where particles stick at the point of ﬁrst contact without further restructuring. Furthermore, there is little
merging or sintering of the clusters in these ﬁlms.

Nanoporous Thin-Films have been of great interest
in recent years due to their unique properties, many of
which originate from the large surface area to volume
ratio. One important application has been the use of
nanoporous Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) in dye-sensitized
solar cells.1 The cluster size and porosity of the ﬁlms
have been shown to be key parameters in the overall eﬃ-
ciency of the cells.2 The deposition process has a large im-
pact on the ﬁanl structure. Other applications of nanos-
tructures, using Tungsten Silicides, show promise for use
in super capacitors.3. Another application is in thermo-
electric materials.4,5 In this paper, we show that grow-
ing ﬁlms by Ballistic Deposition of Nanoclusters result is
nanoporous ﬁlms with large surface area, which may be
well suited for such devices.

The nanocluster source used in this study is based on
Plasma Gas Condensation (PGC) in which clusters are
nucleated and grown by thermalization of a high tem-
perature supersaturated vapor. A source of this type
was ﬁrst developed by Haberland6 and has been used by
numerous groups since.7–10 The vapor is generated by
magnetron sputtering. Much of the existing literature
has dealt with single element materials, however this pro-
cess is well equipped to make multi-element compounds
or alloys.11 We have used the source to grow thin-ﬁlms
from copper clusters as well as tungsten disilicide (WSi2)
clusters. Films grown using such a nanoclusters source
result in very low density ﬁlms which follows a very sim-
ple Ballistic Deposition model.

Ballistic Deposition without restructuring is one of the
simplest deposition models. In this model, particles are
deposited at normal incidence to the substrate, and when
a particle comes in contact with the surface or another
particle it stops and sticks. The resulting ﬁlm structure
is a very loose tree-like structure with few contact points
between particles. Numerical simulations of this process
have been carried out for mono-dispersed spherical parti-

a)rheadrick@uvm.edu

cles which show that the packing fraction of the spheres in
the bulk of the ﬁlm, the volume occupied by the spheres
divided by the total volume of space, is 0.1465.12 In ad-
dition, there is very few points of contact between par-
ticles, the average being two, and the ﬁrst several layers
of particles have a higher density than the bulk of the
ﬁlm.13–15

The nanocluster source was custom built along the
design set by Haberland6 and is shown in Fig. 1 (a).
The magnetron source was mounted inside a water-cooled
stainless-steel tube, called the drift tube, with a 3 mm
aperture at one end. The magnetron has a linear transla-
tion mechanism allowing the target to aperture distance
to be adjusted from 0 mm to 200 mm. This was then
installed in a UHV chamber pumped by a high-volume
turbomolecular pump. The aperture served to allow the
inner chamber to reach high enough pressure to allow
the gas condensation process to occur. Additionally, at
high enough pressures to enter the ﬂuid ﬂow regime, it
collected the clusters into a beam which could then be
directed into either a mass spectrometer or onto a sub-
strate. The key parameters aﬀecting the size and size
distribution of the clusters were Target to Aperture dis-
tance (L), Gas Pressures, and Magnetron Power. The
pressure ranged from 50 mTorr to 1 Torr and L was ﬁxed
at 150 mm for all the processes. Two gases, Argon and
Helium, were used depending on what size of cluster was
desired. For larger clusters, only Argon gas was used.
To get a smaller diameter cluster, a lower Argon pres-
sure was used and Helium was added to raise the overall
pressure into the ﬂuid regime.

The materials used in this study were WSi2 and Cop-
per. Three processes, with diﬀerent sizes from 2 nm to
6 nm, were developed for WSi2 and were labeled process
I, process II, and process III from smallest to largest.
Process parameters are shown in Table I.

In order to measure the mass distribution of the clus-
ter processes, a MesoQ mass spectrometer was purchased
from Mantis Deposition Ltd. The mass spectrometer was
able to scan from 350 amu to 106 amu. A property of

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
1
 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
0
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

(a) Schematic of the Nanocluster Source during deposition experiment. The cluster are generated by high-pressure
FIG. 1.
magnetron sputtering. The clusters are guided through a small aperture by the gas ﬂow into the deposition chamber where they
are deposited on the substrate. Real-Time X-Ray Scattering data is collected during the deposition process. Two scattering
geometries were employed to capture in-plane (Qx) and out of plane (Qz) information throughout the deposition. (b) Analyzed
Data from the GISAXS geometry showing the time evolution of scattering along the Qx direction. The dashed lines mark the
times when the deposition was started and ended. The development of scattering due to the spherical clusters can be seen. (c)
The GISAXS data before and after the deposition. (d) Analyzed Data from the Reﬂectivity Geometry. (e) Crossection through
the image in (d) showing the specular scattering and diﬀuse scattering as a function of Qz. The green data corresponds to the
green dashed line in (d).

FIG. 2.
(a)-(c) Mass Spectrometer curves for three diﬀerent size processes. The red lines are ﬁts using a log-normal
distribution. The green marks are the peak mass which, for when multiple peak were present,was calculated as a weighted
mean of the individual peak masses. (d)-(f) GISAXS curves for the same processes along with ﬁts using a log-normal distribution
of diameters. The peak mass and peak diameter values were then used to calculate the density of the clusters for the three
processes.

TABLE I. Nanocluster process parameters, mass, diameter, and density for L = 150 mm.

3

Process

WSi2 - I
WSi2 - II
WSi2 - III

Copper

20
50
50
100

(Torr)
0.243
0.550
0.550

1.0

1
0
0
0

Argon Flow & Pressure
(sccm)

Helium Flow & Pressure
(sccm)

(Torr)
0.394

0
0
0

Power
(W)
25
50
25
100

Mass
(amu)
5.02×104
3.51×105
8.61×105
3.14×105

Diameter

Density

(nm)
2.25
4.0
5.6
4.9

(amu/nm3)
8.41×103
1.04×104
1.45×104
5.02×103

(g/cm3)

13.95
16.72
15.67
8.47

clusters generated by PGC is that the majority of the
clusters have an inherent negative charge. This allowed
the use of the mass spectrometer without an ionization
stage. In order to improve the vacuum inside the mass
spectrometer, the main chamber and spectrometer cham-
ber were isolated by another aperture of 8 mm diameter.
The spectrometer chamber was pumped by a 300 l/s tur-
bomolecular pump.

For In-situ X-ray scattering experiments, the drift tube
was installed on a custom UHV chamber at beamline
X21 of the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS)
at Brookhaven National Lab. The Scattering was per-
formed at an energy of 10 keV with an X-Ray spot size
of 0.5 mm by 1 mm. The detector was a Pilatus 100k
pixel array area detector.
In order to measure both
in-plane and out of plane ﬁlm structures, two scatter-
ing geometries were used, Grazing Incidence Small An-
gle X-Ray Scattering (GISAXS) and X-Ray Reﬂectivity
(XRR). For Real-Time measurements of the deposition
process, GISAXS was performed by setting the exit angle
at the critical angle of the substrate. The incidence angle
was set above the critical angle to keep the specular re-
ﬂection oﬀ the detector. At various mean ﬁlm thicknesses
the deposition was stopped and XRR was performed. In
this geometry the incident and exit angles were set equal
and swept from 0.1 to 5 degrees. In addition to the spec-
ular beam, diﬀuse scattering along the in-plane direction
(Qx) was measured at each incident angle. This allowed
for a full mapping of the diﬀuse scattering in Qx and Qz
at discrete thicknesses.

The density of the clusters was determined from the
cluster mass and cluster diameter. The mass spectrom-
eter was used to characterize the mass distribution for
all processes. For clusters grown in a vapor absorption
process, the cluster size distribution follows a lognormal
distribution.16 A simple form of a log-normal distribution
is given by:

Φ(x, µ, σ) =

√
1
2π

σ

exp

(cid:20)
− (ln x − ln µ)2

(cid:21)

2σ2

, x > 0

(1)

In this form of the equation the parameter µ represents
the peak value (mode) of the distribution. Since the mass
of the clusters goes as the cube root of the radius, it fol-
lows that the mass distribution is also lognormal. Mass
Spectrometer curves for the three processes are shown in
Fig. 2 (a)-(c). The plot is semi-log x and shows that

the distribution appears normal, as is the case for log-
normal distributions. The red lines are ﬁts using Eq. 1.
It was found that the larger size processes had multiple
peaks develop indicating a more complex nucleation and
growth process. A more detailed view of the ﬁts using
multiple distributions is shown in the supplemental ma-
terials. The peak mass for each process is shown in Table
I. The mean value of the peak mass for Process III was
used since it showed two prominent peaks.

The cluster diameter was determined from the
GISAXS measurement during early stages of growth,
where the coverage of the surface was low. At this
stage there should be little contact between clusters and
the clusters will be randomly distributed on the surface.
In general, the scattering intensity will be given by I
= S((cid:126)q)|F ((cid:126)q, r)|2, where F ((cid:126)q, r) is the form factor for a
spherical particle of radius r, and S((cid:126)q) is the interference
function relating to particle positions. As the deposi-
tion process is random, and surface diﬀusion is assumed
to be low, there is no long range order in the arrange-
ment of clusters and the GISAXS intensity is propor-
tional to the particle size only, i.e. ignore any contribu-
tion from S((cid:126)q). Finally, since there is a distribution of
particle sizes, the overall scattering intensity is given by I

=(cid:80) Φ(r)|F ((cid:126)q, r)|2/(cid:80) Φ(r), where Φ(r) is the distribu-

tion of particle sizes. The data is shown in Fig. 2 (d)-(f),
with ﬁts in red, using a lognormal distribution for the
particle sizes. The peak diameter for each process was
taken from the parameter µ and is shown in Table I.

The density of the particles for each process is summa-
rized in Table I. It is interesting to note that for all the
WSi2 processes, the density was quite a bit higher than
the bulk density of WSi2 (9.3 g/cm3). The density is
much closer to another stable phase of tungsten silicide,
W5Si3 (14.55 g/cm3). As a control, the copper density
was calculated and is close to the bulk value (8.9 g/cm3).
Next, the structure of the ﬁlms was analyzed. X-Ray
reﬂectivity at various stages of deposition revealed how
the structure of the ﬁlm changed with mean thickness.
Fig. 1 (d) shows an image constructed from the specular
and diﬀuse scattering during a late stage deposition re-
ﬂectivity scan. The image is interesting in that it shows
both the diﬀuse scattering from the spherical clusters,
which is spread out in reciprocal space, and the specu-
lar rod which is conﬁned to Qx = 0. More interesting
is comparing the specular scattering to the oﬀ-specular
scattering as shown in Fig. 1 (e). The oﬀ specular diﬀuse

4

Evolution of the Critical Angle with thickness.
FIG. 3.
The raw data at several mean thickness is shown in (a). The
critical angle as a function of mean thickness is shown in (b).
The dashed lines are the expected critical angle for diﬀerent
packings of clusters. The data is clearly converging towards
the ballistic model.

scattering shows fringes due the the spherical clusters
that make up the ﬁlm. Looking at the specular scatter-
ing we also see the same fringes. Clearly, as the specular
intensity is several orders of magnitude greater than the
diﬀuse intensity, these fringes are part of the specular
scattering.

√

The specular reﬂectivity contains information about
the average electron density in the direction normal to
the surface. The critical angle of the curves is related
4πρr0/k.17
to the average electron density by: θc =
Fig. 3 (a) shows the evolution of the critical angle with
mean thickness. For a perfectly smooth curve the inten-
sity drops abruptly at the critical angle. However for a
rough interface, the curve is rounded out near the critical
angle. The value of the critical angle was taken as the
location of the steepest slope on the curve. Fig. 3 (b)
shows the critical angle versus mean thickness. It is clear
that the critical angle is falling to lower Q indicating an
even lower density than the substrate. Several expected
critical angles for diﬀerent packing fractions are shown
as dashed lines. These represent a continuous ﬁlm, ran-
dom close pack (RCP), and Ballistic deposition without
restructuring. The data is converging on the prediction
of the ballistic deposition model.

The specular reﬂectivity contains more information
than just the average electron density of the ﬁlm. As
seen in Fig. 4 a. there are several features in the curves
which are related to the structure of the ﬁlms. To eval-
uate these features, the curves were ﬁt using a simple
multilayer model and the Parratt formalism. The Par-
ratt method is a dynamical theory based on scattering oﬀ
continuous layers and also accounts for multiple scatter-
ing events.18 This method is justiﬁed since the specular
reﬂectivity is not sensitive to the in-plane structure of
the ﬁlm. Therefore, clusters on a surface appear as a
continuous ﬁlm, only with a lower density than the clus-

(a) Reﬂectivity scans for diﬀerent mean thicknesses
FIG. 4.
along with ﬁts for Process I. Scattering at high Q develops
early in the deposition due to the layer of particles in contact
with the surface. This scattering remains ﬁxed through the
remainder of the deposition. Kiessig fringes develop at low
Q, though are heavily damped due to the roughness of the
top layer. (b) The eﬀect of the ﬁrst layer of clusters on the
reﬂectivity. The data is the 7 nm mean thickness from Process
I. The green line represents a single layer ﬁlm with a mean
thickness of 7 nm. The red line is a three-layer ﬁlm of the
same mean thickness, however the ﬁrst two layer represent
the layer of clusters in contact with the substrate. This model
is a much closer ﬁt of the data. The corresponding electron
density for the two models is shown in the inset. This electron
density is similar to the electron density predicted by ballistic
deposition.

ter density, which depends on the coverage of clusters.
We also include a roughness factor for each layer which
assumes a Gaussian roughness.

The evolution of the specular reﬂectivity has several
interesting features which are unique to this deposition
model. Typically when a thin ﬁlm grows we see the ap-
pearance of Kiessig fringes, due to interference between
scattered x-rays from the ﬁlm surface and substrate. The
spacing of the fringes is inversely proportional to the
thickness of the ﬁlm, which decrease as the ﬁlm gets
thicker. In our data we do see oscillations appear early
in the deposition process. However, they stay ﬁxed in q
throughout the whole deposition. Only for the thicker
layers do we see Kiessig fringes develop. The absence of
Kiessig fringes during the early deposition is due to the
roughness of the layer. The roughness is on the order
of the thickness for the early stages of deposition which
completely damps out the Kiessig fringes. At later stages,
the thickness becomes much larger than the roughness,
and Kiessig fringes appear, though heavily damped due
to the roughness.

The features at high-q which remain static throughout
the deposition are due to the layer of clusters which are
in contact with the surface.
In the ballistic deposition
process, most of the clusters are at diﬀerent heights which
are uncorrelated and hence will average out. However,
clusters in contact with the substrate are at the same

height and hence to not average out. This layer will
have a higher electron density than the rest of the layer.
Fig. 4 b. shows the reﬂectivity for a single layer versus
the reﬂectivity for a multilayer. The addition of this
ﬁrst layer ﬁts the data quite nicely. The inset shows
the corresponding electron density for each case.

We have shown that a simple ballistic deposition model
ﬁts the structure of nanocluster deposited thin-ﬁlms. The
clusters have few points of contact leaving most of the
surface area exposed. An interesting question is to what
degree the cluster merge on contact. For W2, there ap-
pears to be very little merging and the clusters retain
their spherical shape, as seen in the diﬀuse scattering
(Fig. 1 (d)). In the copper cluster data, we do see ev-
idence that the clusters are merging, though on a very
slow time scale. This is shown in the supplemental mate-
rial. Even with a signiﬁcant degree of sintering, since the
number of contact points is very low and density of clus-
ters is very low, it is unlikely for the material to merge
into a continuous thin ﬁlm. A more detailed study of this
sintering behavior is warranted for future studies.

1B. O’regan and M. Gr¨atzel, “A low-cost, high-eﬃciency solar cell
based on dye-sensitized colloidal tio2 ﬁlms,” nature 353, 737–740
(1991).
2C. J. Barbe, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann,
V. Shklover, and M. Gr¨atzel, “Nanocrystalline titanium oxide
electrodes for photovoltaic applications,” Journal of the Ameri-
can Ceramic Society 80, 3157–3171 (1997).
3M. N. Banis, X. Meng, Y. Zhang, M. Cai, R. Li, and X. Sun,
“Spatially sequential growth of various wsi2 networked nanos-
tructures and mechanisms,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry
C 117, 19189–19194 (2013).
4N. Petermann, T. Schneider, J. St¨otzel, N. Stein, C. Weise,
I. Wlokas, G. Schierning, and H. Wiggers, “Microwave plasma
synthesis of si/ge and si/wsi2 nanoparticles for thermoelectric
applications,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 48, 314010
(2015).
5N. Mingo, D. Hauser, N. Kobayashi, M. Plissonnier,
and
A. Shakouri, “nanoparticle-in-alloy approach to eﬃcient thermo-
electrics: silicides in sige,” Nano letters 9, 711–715 (2009).

5

ion source,” Zeitschrift

6H. Haberland, M. Karrais,
and M. Mall, “A new type
of cluster and cluster
f¨ur Physik
D Atoms, Molecules and Clusters 20, 413–415 (1991),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01544025.
7T. Hihara and K. Sumiyama, “Formation and size control of a ni
cluster by plasma gas condensation,” Journal of applied physics
84, 5270–5276 (1998).
8M. Drabik, A. Choukourov, A. Artemenko, O. Polonskyi,
O. Kylian, J. Kousal, L. Nichtova, V. Cimrova, D. Slavinska,
and H. Biederman, “Structure and composition of titanium nan-
ocluster ﬁlms prepared by a gas aggregation cluster source,” The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 115, 20937–20944 (2011).
9K. Meinander and K. Nordlund, “Modeling of ﬁlm growth by
cluster deposition: The eﬀect of size and energy,” Physical Re-
view B 79, 235435 (2009).

10F. Urban Iii, A. Hosseini-Tehrani, P. Griﬃths, A. Khabari, Y.-
W. Kim, and I. Petrov, “Nanophase ﬁlms deposited from a high-
rate, nanoparticle beam,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technol-
ogy B 20, 995–999 (2002).

11L. Mart´ınez, M. D´ıaz, E. Rom´an, M. Ruano, D. Llamosa P.,
and Y. Huttel, “Generation of nanoparticles with adjustable size
and controlled stoichiometry: Recent advances,” Langmuir 28,
11241–11249 (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/la3022134.

12R. Jullien and P. Meakin, “Simple three-dimensional models for
ballistic deposition with restructuring,” EPL (Europhysics Let-
ters) 4, 1385 (1987).

13B. Lubachevsky, V. Privman, and S. Roy, “Morphology of amor-
phous layers ballistically deposited on a planar substrate,” Phys-
ical Review E 47, 48 (1993).

14P. Meakin, P. Ramanlal, L. M. Sander, and R. Ball, “Ballistic

deposition on surfaces,” Physical Review A 34, 5091 (1986).

15B. D. Lubachevsky, V. Privman, and S. C. Roy, “Casting pearls
ballistically: Eﬃcient massively parallel simulation of particle
deposition,” Journal of Computational Physics 126, 152–164
(1996).

16J. S¨oderlund, L. Kiss, G. Niklasson, and C. Granqvist, “Log-
normal size distributions in particle growth processes without
coagulation,” Physical review letters 80, 2386 (1998).

17J. Als-Nielsen and D. McMorrow, Elements of modern X-ray

physics (John Wiley & Sons, 2011).

18L. G. Parratt, “Surface studies of solids by total reﬂection of

x-rays,” Physical review 95, 359 (1954).

