6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
1

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
7
0
1
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Velocity Amplitudes in Global Convection Simulations:

The Role of the Prandtl Number and Near-Surface

Driving

Bridget O’Maraa, Mark S. Mieschb,∗, Nicholas A. Featherstonec, Kyle C.

Augustsonb

aPhysics Department, Regis University, 3333 Regis Blvd, Denver, CO, 80221, USA
bHigh Altitude Observatory, National Center for Atmospheric Research, 3080 Center

cDept. Applied Mathematics, Univ. of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA

Green Dr., Boulder, CO 80301, USA

Abstract

Several lines of evidence suggest that the velocity amplitude in global
simulations of solar convection, U , may be systematically over-estimated.
Motivated by these recent results, we explore the factors that determine U
and we consider how these might scale to solar parameter regimes. To this
end, we decrease the thermal diﬀusivity κ along two paths in parameter
space. If the kinematic viscosity ν is decreased proportionally with κ (ﬁxing
the Prandtl number Pr = ν/κ), we ﬁnd that U increases but asymptotes
toward a constant value, as found by Featherstone and Hindman (2016).
However, if ν is held ﬁxed while decreasing κ (increasing Pr), we ﬁnd that U
systematically decreases. We attribute this to an enhancement of the thermal
content of downﬂow plumes, which allows them to carry the solar luminosity
with slower ﬂow speeds. We contrast this with the case of Rayleigh-B´enard
convection which is not subject to this luminosity constraint. This dramatic
diﬀerence in behavior for the two paths in parameter space (ﬁxed Pr or ﬁxed
ν) persists whether the heat transport by unresolved, near-surface convection
is modeled as a thermal conduction or as a ﬁxed ﬂux. The results suggest
that if solar convection can operate in a high-Pr regime, then this might

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: bomara@regis.edu (Bridget O’Mara), miesch@ucar.edu (Mark S.

Miesch), nicholas.featherstone@colorado.edu (Nicholas A. Featherstone),
kyle.augustson@gmail.com (Kyle C. Augustson)

Preprint submitted to Advances in Space Research

March 22, 2016

eﬀectively limit the velocity amplitude. Small-scale magnetism is a possible
source of enhanced viscosity that may serve to achieve this high-Pr regime.

Keywords: Sun: interior, convection

1. Introduction

Observations clearly indicate that the surface of the Sun is blanketed by
roughly a million convection cells, each with a characteristic size of about
1.4 Mm and a typical lifetime of about 10-15 min. This is the well-known
phenomena of solar granulation and it represents the dominant scale of con-
vection in the solar photosphere. Granulation is well understood theoretically
and modern numerical simulations are able to reproduce observations with
striking ﬁdelity (Nordlund et al., 2009). In fact, modeling solar granulation
is arguably one of the most notable success stories in all of computational
astrophysics.

However, there is far more to solar convection than solar granulation.
Granulation alone cannot account for the diﬀerential rotation and meridional
circulation apparent from surface observations and helioseismic inversions.
Furthermore, it is these mean ﬂows, together with the deeper, larger-scale
convective motions that must maintain them, that are thought to be respon-
sible for establishing the solar activity cycle (Miesch, 2005; Charbonneau,
2010).

There are three recent research developments that suggest our current un-
derstanding of deep solar convection may be incomplete. The ﬁrst comes
from the same numerical simulations of solar surface convection that do so
well at capturing granulation. When these are extended to larger horizon-
tal and vertical scales, they tend to over-estimate the power at low spec-
tral wavenumbers when compared to photospheric observations (Lord et al.,
2014). For the largest horizontal scales in the simulations, 196 Mm, the
characteristic amplitude of convective velocities is at least three times larger
than that inferred from correlation tracking of photospheric features, with
the trend suggesting even larger discrepancies at larger scales. Furthermore,
the peak vertical velocities at the bottom of the computational domain, 49
Mm below the solar surface, can exceed several hundred m s−1. Though
these surface convection simulations neglect rotation, such large convective
velocities suggest a weak rotational inﬂuence.

2

To demonstrate this, we can quantify the rotational inﬂuence by means of
the Rossby number Ro = U/(2ΩL) where Ω is some measure of the rotation
rate and U and L are typical convective velocity and length scales. If we take
Ω = 2.7 × 10−6 rad s−1 U ∼ 200 m s−1, and L ∼ Hρ ∼ 28 Mm, where Hρ is
the density scale height, we obtain Ro ∼ 1.3. This appears to be at odds with
the diﬀerential rotation of the Sun inferred from photospheric observations
and helioseismic inversions, which reveal a ∼30% decrease in angular velocity
from equator to pole. Such a substantial diﬀerential rotation implies eﬃcient
angular momentum transport by the convective Reynolds stress (Miesch,
2005). This in turn requires the strong Coriolis-induced velocity correlations
that are generally associated with Ro (cid:28) 1.

This expectation is borne out by global simulations of solar and stellar
convection, which show a dramatic change in the diﬀerential rotation proﬁle
near Ro = 1 (Guerrero et al., 2013; Gastine et al., 2014; Fan and Fang, 2014;
K¨apyl¨a et al., 2014; Featherstone and Miesch, 2015; Karak et al., 2015). For
Ro (cid:28) 1, diﬀerential rotation proﬁles are generally solar-like in the sense that
the Ω gradient is equatorward, decreasing from equator to pole (though the
Ω contours are often more cylindrically-aligned than in the Sun). For Ro (cid:38) 1,
diﬀerential rotation proﬁles are anti-solar, with a poleward Ω gradient. This
is attributed to the tendency for convective motions to conserve their angular
momentum locally when the rotational inﬂuence is weak.

Global simulations of solar convection often fall in the anti-solar rotation
regime, suggesting that they are over-estimating the Rossby number of the
deep solar convection zone. This contradiction is consistent with the velocity
amplitudes of surface convection simulations described above but represents a
second, independent recent research development that calls into question our
current understanding of deep solar convection. Current global simulations
of solar convection often artiﬁcially reduce the Rossby number by increasing
the rotation rate (Augustson et al., 2015; Karak et al., 2015) or by decreasing
the convective luminosity, which in turn suppresses U (Racine et al., 2011;
Guerrero et al., 2013; Fan and Fang, 2014; Hotta et al., 2015a).

Recent results from local helioseismology also suggest that numerical and
theoretical models may be over-estimating the velocity amplitudes of deep
solar convection, though the evidence is mixed. This is the third develop-
ment referred to above. Hanasoge et al. (2010, 2012) searched for signatures
of giant cells in helioseismic time-distance measurements and did not ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant signal. They placed an upper limit of less than 3 m s−1 for each
spherical harmonic degree (cid:96) at r = 0.96R for convective motions with co-

3

herence times longer than 24 hours and (cid:96) < 60, where R is the solar radius.
When the coherence time was increased to 96 hours, they inferred amplitudes
of less than 1 m s−1 for each (cid:96). When summed over all spherical harmonic
modes (cid:96) < 60, this corresponds to an upper limit on U of less than 10 m s−1.
This upper limit is more than an order of magnitude lower than the convec-
tive velocities typically found in global convection simulations and predicted
from mixing-length theory. Furthermore, it is hard to reconcile with helio-
seismic measurements of the diﬀerential rotation and meridional circulation
(Miesch et al., 2012). More recent helioseismic estimates of the convective
ﬂow speed using ring-diagram analysis by Greer et al. (2015) suggest values
that are closer to the theoretical models. They ﬁnd U ∼ 120 m s−1 at r ∼
0.96-0.97 R. For a recent review of these and other results, see Hanasoge
et al. (2016).

Though each of these three recent developments is subject to its own
uncertainties, they collectively suggest that there may be something funda-
mental about deep solar convection that we are missing. In short, we may
state the convective conundrum as follows: The convective velocities re-
quired to transport the solar luminosity in global models of solar convection
appear to be systematically larger than those required to maintain the solar
diﬀerential rotation and those inferred from solar observations.

Even more to the point of this paper, the problem seems to get worse as
the dissipation is decreased. Due to computational constraints, the values
of the kinematic viscosity ν and the thermal diﬀusivity κ that are currently
used in global convection simulations are orders of magnitude larger than
the corresponding values of the actual solar plasma. One would hope that
the conundrum might resolve itself if ν and κ could be drastically reduced,
making the parameter regime closer to the Sun. However, simulations have
instead found that lowering ν and κ can exacerbate the problem by further
increasing the eﬀective Rossby number (Guerrero et al., 2013; Gastine et al.,
2014; Featherstone and Miesch, 2015; Karak et al., 2015).

Motivated by this conundrum, we have performed idealized numerical ex-
periments to investigate the nature of the convective driving in global simu-
lations. We focus in particular on signiﬁcance of the Prandtl number, which
is the ratio of viscous to thermal diﬀusion; Pr = ν/κ. We demonstrate that
a high value of Pr helps to limit U as κ is decreased and we argue that
this may help to resolve the convective conundrum. We also demonstrate
that this conclusion is insensitive to the details of how the heat transport by
unresolved near-surface convection is parameterized.

4

In section 2 we describe the Rayleigh code, which we use to solve the
anelastic ﬂuid equations in a spherical shell, as well as the setup of the
numerical experiments. For these fundamental studies we neglect rotation.
We present the results of our numerical experiments in sections 3 and 4,
which focus on the role of the Prandtl number and the upper boundary layer
respectively. We close with a discussion and summary of our results and
their implications in sections 5 and 6.

2. Numerical Experiments

2.1. Numerical Model

This study is based around a series of 3-D, nonlinear convection models run
with the Rayleigh convection code. Rayleigh is a modern, parallel code that
has been designed to simulate thermal convection in spherical geometries at
high resolution; see Featherstone and Hindman (2016, hereafter FH16) and
a forthcoming code paper for further details.

Rayleigh employs a pseudo-spectral approach, meaning that derivatives
along each axis are calculated in the relevant spectral conﬁguration, whereas
nonlinear terms are calculated after ﬁrst transforming to physical space. We
represent the horizontal variation of all variables along spherical surfaces us-
ing spherical harmonics Y m
(cid:96) (θ, φ) where (cid:96) is the spherical harmonic degree,
and m is the azimuthal order. In the radial direction, we expand all variables
using Chebyshev polynomials Tn(r), where n is the degree of the Chebyshev
polynomial. Time-integration is carried out in the spectral conﬁguration us-
ing a hybrid implicit-explicit approach. A Crank-Nicolson method is used
for linear terms, and an Adams-Bashforth approach is employed for the non-
linear terms. Both components of the time-stepping are 2nd-order in time.
The numerical algorithm for Rayleigh is similar to the well-known Anelas-
tic Spherical Harmonic (ASH) code (Clune et al., 1999; Brun et al., 2004).
However, Rayleigh has been designed to be a bit more ﬂexible (with a Carte-
sian option) and more scalable (somewhat higher parallel eﬃciency) than
ASH. It is also somewhat more accessible for both students and the com-
munity; the plan is to distribute it publicly by means of the Computational
Infrastructure for Geophysics (CIG; see http://geodynamics.org/cig).

Our study is concerned with convection as it manifests deep within stellar
interiors, far removed from the photospheric surface where radiative pro-
cesses may contribute considerably to the energetics of the convection. In
such a region of the star, plasma motions are subsonic and perturbations to

5

thermodynamic variables are small compared to their mean, horizontally av-
eraged values. Under such conditions, the anelastic approximation, which we
employ, provides a convenient means of describing the thermodynamic back-
ground state of the system (Gough, 1969; Gilman and Glatzmaier, 1981).

Under this approximation, thermodynamic variables are linearized about a
spherically symmetric reference state with density ¯ρ, pressure ¯P , temperature
¯T , and speciﬁc entropy ¯S. Here we use an adiabatic reference state so ∇ ¯S =
0. Fluctuations about this state are denoted as ρ, P , T , and S. A further
consequence of the anelastic approximation is that the mass ﬂux is solenoidal,
reducing the continuity equation to

∇ · (¯ρ(cid:126)v) = 0,

(1)

where (cid:126)v is the velocity vector expressed in spherical coordinates: (cid:126)v = (vr, vθ, vφ).
The lack of any time derivative in Equation (1) means that sound waves are
naturally ﬁltered out as a consequence of this approach. The divergence-free
constraint for the mass ﬂux is enforced by projecting (cid:126)v onto poloidal and
toroidal streamfunctions (W and Z respectively), such that

¯ρ(cid:126)v = ∇×∇×(W (cid:126)er) + ∇×(Z(cid:126)er).

(2)

The unit vector in the radial direction is indicated by (cid:126)er. The momentum
equation is given by

¯ρ

∂(cid:126)v
∂t

+ ¯ρ ((cid:126)v·∇) (cid:126)v = −∇P + ρ(cid:126)g − ∇ · D,

(3)
where (cid:126)g is the gravitational acceleration. The viscous stress tensor D is given
by

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

Dij = −2¯ρν

eij − 1
3

(∇ · (cid:126)v)δij

,

(4)

where eij is the strain rate tensor, the kinematic viscosity is denoted by ν,
and δij is the Kronecker delta. Our thermal energy equation is given by

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

¯ρ ¯T

∂S
∂t

+ ¯ρ ¯T (cid:126)v·∇S = ∇ · [κ¯ρ ¯T∇S] + 2¯ρν

eijeij − 1
3

(∇ · (cid:126)v)2

+ Q,

(5)

where the thermal diﬀusivity denoted by κ. Both κ and ν are assumed to
be constant, independent of r, θ, φ, and t. Sources of internal heating and

6

cooling are encapsulated by Q (see Sec. 2.2). A linearized equation of state
closes our set of equations and is given by

ρ
¯ρ

=

P
¯P

− T
¯T

=

P
γ ¯P

− S
cp

.

(6)

assuming the ideal gas law

(7)
The speciﬁc heat at constant pressure is denoted by cp, R is the gas constant,
and γ is the adiabatic index of the gas.

¯P = R¯ρ ¯T .

2.2. The Numerical Experiments

We have constructed a series of fourteen stellar convection zone models
designed to explore how the convective kinetic energy scales as we decrease
the dissipation, approaching solar parameter regimes as discussed in Sec. 1.
We focus in particular on how this scaling depends on the Prandtl number Pr,
and on the prescription for cooling at the upper boundary. These simulations
are summarized in Table 1.

Each of our models is constructed using a polytropic background state
following Jones et al. (2011). This approach has the advantage that the
thermodynamic background may be speciﬁed analytically, making it easily
reproducible. All the simulations reported here have the same background
state, which is completely speciﬁed by seven numbers: the inner radius of the
shell ri = 5.0 × 1010 cm (0.718 R), the outer radius of the shell ro = 6.586 ×
1010 cm (0.946R), the polytropic index np = 1.5, the number of density scale
heights occurring within the shell Nρ = 3, the mass interior to the shell
Mi = 1.989 × 1033 g, the density at the inner boundary ρi = 1.805 × 10−1 g
cm−3, and cp = 3.5× 108 erg g−1 K−1. We note that when constructed using
these parameters, the thermodynamic background state closely resembles
that of the Sun (FH16).

For all simulations, we have adopted impenetrable and stress free bound-

ary conditions such that

vr =

∂(vθ/r)

∂r

=

∂(vφ/r)

∂r

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=ri,ro

= 0

.

(8)

For the C series of simulations listed in Table 1, the radial entropy gradient
is forced to vanish at the lower boundary of the convection zone, and the

7

entropy perturbations are forced to vanish at the upper boundary:

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=ri

∂S
∂r

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=ro

= 0

, S = 0

.

(9)

Thus, there is no diﬀusive entropy ﬂux across the lower boundary. Heat is
deposited into this system by Q instead, which drops to zero at the upper
boundary. In all simulations, we adopt a functional form for Q that depends
only on the background pressure gradient such that
Q(r) = α( ¯P (r) − ¯P (ro)).

(10)

The normalization constant α is chosen so that

L(cid:12) = 4π

Q(r)r2dr,

(11)

where L(cid:12) is the solar luminosity. We then deﬁne a corresponding radial
energy ﬂux Fr(r) as follows:

Fr(r) = F∗ − 1
r2

Q(x)x2dx.

(12)

where F∗ = L(cid:12)/(4πr2). We give this ﬂux the subscript r because we identify
it with the ﬂux due to radiative diﬀusion.
It is deﬁned such that Q =
−∇·(Fr(cid:126)er), Fr(ri) = F∗ and Fr(ro) = 0. Thus, radiative diﬀusion carries the
entire solar luminosity in to the computational domain through the bottom
boundary and no ﬂux through the top boundary. This implies a convergence
of Fr that establishes and sustains the convection.

To illustrate how this occurs, we consider the other components of the
radial heat ﬂux, which include the convective enthalpy ﬂux Fe, the kinetic
energy ﬂux Fk, and the conductive ﬂux Fc, deﬁned as follows:

(cid:90) ro

ri

(cid:90) r

ri

2 ¯ρ(cid:10)vr |v|2(cid:11)

Fe = ¯ρCp (cid:104)vrT(cid:105)
Fk = 1
Fc = κ¯ρ ∂(cid:104)S(cid:105)

.

∂r

(13)
(14)

(15)

Angular brackets denote averages over horizontal surfaces (θ and φ). In a
steady state, these ﬂuxes must balance such that Fe + Fk + Fr + Fc = F∗.

8

Figure 1: (Left) Flux balance for case C1. The y axis represents the energy ﬂux normalized
by the solar ﬂux F∗ and the x axis represents the radius normalized by the solar radius R.
The red dotted line represents the kinetic energy ﬂux Fk, the green dash-dotted line is the
conductive ﬂux Fc, the purple dashed line is the enthalpy ﬂux Fe, the blue solid line is the
radiative ﬂux Fr, and the black solid line near unity represents the sum of all the ﬂuxes.
The graph shows a rise in the enthalpy ﬂux in the middle of the convection zone. (Right)
This graph shows the speciﬁc entropy S over the convection zone for diﬀerent values of κ
while ν is held constant at 8× 1012 cm2 s−1. The blue line represents κ = 8× 1012 cm2 s−1
(case C1), the green line represents κ = 6 × 1012 cm2 s−1 (Case C2), the red represents
κ = 4 × 1012 cm2 s−1(Case C3), and the tiel represents κ = 2 × 1012 cm2 s−1 (Case C4).
As κ decreases the graph shows a systematic increase in ∆S.

9

Each simulation is initialized using a small random thermal ﬂuctuation.
As time proceeds, the convergence of the radiative heat ﬂux heats the convec-
tion zone (CZ), raising the adiabat and establishing a negative ∂S/∂r near
the surface, as illustrated in the right panel of Fig. 1. This superadibatic
entropy gradient excites convective motions that grow to dominate the heat
transport through the mid CZ by means of the resolved convective ﬂuxes Fe
and Fk. The resulting balance is shown in Fig. 1 for Case C1 as an example.
Each simulation was evolved until the kinetic energy reached a statistically
steady (equilibrated) state, and then further evolved for at least one thermal
diﬀusion time (some were evolved up to ten thermal diﬀusion times).

For the C series of simulations, heat exits the upper boundary via the
conductive ﬂux, Fc. There, the steepness of the equilibrated entropy gradient
is entirely dependent upon the thermodynamic background state, the value
of the thermal diﬀusivity κ, and the chosen luminosity. Speciﬁcally,

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=ro

∂S
∂r

=

L(cid:12)

4πr2

oκ¯ρ(ro) ¯T (ro)

.

(16)

This leads to a variation among simulations in the entropy diﬀerence across
. Equilibrated values of ∆S for all simulations

the CZ, ∆S = (cid:104)S(cid:105)r=ri

−(cid:104)S(cid:105)r=ro

are included in Table 1.

For the G series of simulations, eq. (16) no longer holds. There we have
imposed another ﬂux component Fg that contributes to the heat transport
through the outer surface (see Table 1). This is intended to mimic heat
transport by small-scale surface convection as discussed in §4. We have also
modiﬁed the upper thermal boundary condition in the G series, ﬁxing the
entropy gradient, ∂S/∂r, as opposed to the entropy S, as expressed in eq.
(9). Apart from these diﬀerences, the G series was initiated and evolved in a
similar manner as the C series. The diﬀerence between the diﬀerent members
of the C and G series are the values of κ and ν, as indicated in Table 1.

3. Results: The Role of the Prandtl Number

The Prandtl Number (Pr) is deﬁned as Pr = ν/κ (Sec. 2.1). FH16 in-
vestigated the scaling of the kinetic energy with κ in global, non-rotating
convection simulations for the special case in which the value of Pr is ﬁxed at
unity. They found that the characteristic velocity amplitude U ﬁrst increased
slightly as κ was decreased but then asymptoted toward a constant value in
the limit κ → 0. Here we consider the case in which ν is held ﬁxed as κ is

10

∆S

erg g−1 K−1

4620
5560
7060
10300
5450
6780
8870
3040
2690
2422
2033
2704
2312
1900

Flux
Fc
Fc
Fc
Fc
Fc
Fc
Fc

1

1.33

2
4
1
1
1
1

Fc + Fg
1.33 Fc + Fg
Fc + Fg
Fc + Fg
Fc + Fg
Fc + Fg
Fc + Fg

2
4
1
1
1

Table 1: Simulation Summary.

Pr

Surface

Case

κ

(1012 cm2 s−1)

ν

(1012 cm2 s−1)

C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
G6
G7

8
6
4
2
6
4
2
8
6
4
2
6
4
2

8
8
8
8
6
4
2
8
8
8
8
6
4
2

11

Figure 2: Radial velocity snapshots at r = 0.93R for (Left) Case C1 and (Right) Case
C4 (Molleweide projection). The red indicates movement up and out of the sun while the
blue indicates movement down and into the sun, as indicated by the color bars (saturation
levels in cm s−1).

decreased (implying an increasing value of Pr) and we ﬁnd that in this case
U systematically decreases.

In ﬁgure 1 (left) we show the ﬂux balance across the convection zone for
an illustrative simulation in the C series, case C1. The ﬁgure shows that Fr is
the main transporter of the solar luminosity at low values of r (see Sec. 2.2).
Near the center of the convection zone (r ≈ 0.83R) Fe transports nearly all
the solar luminosity to the sun’s surface, while at the boundaries (r = 0.70
and r = 0.95) Fe transports none of the solar luminosity. Fc takes over as
the main carrier of the solar luminosity as r → ro.

In the right panel of ﬁgure 1 we look at the speciﬁc entropy over r for
various κ values. As the value of κ decreases (blue being case C1 and tiel
being case C4) we see an increase in the change of the speciﬁc entropy from
the bottom to the top of the convection zone. As noted in Sec. 2.2, this
change occurs because a lower κ value causes an increase in the entropy
gradient between the center and top of the convection zone (see eq. 16).

Figures 2 and 3 compare the structure of the convection in two simulations
with the same value of ν but diﬀerent values of κ (Cases C1 and C4). A lower
κ value increases both the Rayleigh number and the Prandtl number, causing
the convection to become more intricate and apparently more turbulent (Fig.
2). Both the characteristic size of the convection cells and the characteristic
width of downﬂow lanes is smaller for Case C4 (right panel) than for Case C1
(left panel). The latter can be attributed to the thinner thermal boundary
layer (see the right panel of Fig. 1 and Sec. 5).

Similar results are observed in the snapshots of the speciﬁc entropy in

12

the mid CZ for cases C1 and C4 (Fig. 3). The smaller value of κ yields a
more intricate, smaller-scale structure with larger thermal ﬂuctuations. In
the right panel of Fig. 3 smaller and sharper features can be seen than in
the left panel. This is particularly noticeable for the cold spots (blue) which
represent small, cool plumes of ﬂuid that sink down from the surface layers.
Also notable in Fig. 3 is a pronounced dipole convective mode, visible
here as a pattern with longitudinal wavenumber m = 1. This is a common
feature for convection in non-rotating spherical geometries, related to the
linearly preferred convective modes (Chandrasekhar, 1961). It is analogous
to the box mode or “wind” that commonly arises in studies of convection in
Cartesian geometry. Its presence is further promoted by the ﬁxed-heat ﬂux
lower boundary condition, which favors convective modes with long horizon-
tal wavelengths (Chapman and Proctor, 1980; Depassier and Spiegel, 1981).
The dipolar mode is most visible in temperature or entropy plots but it can
be seen in radial velocity plots as well (e.g. Fig. 2). The primary eﬀect of the
dipole mode is to sweep small-scale, plume-like structures out of the dipolar
upﬂow region, thereby causing them to cluster in the region of convergence
associated with the dipolar downﬂow region. This eﬀect is not observed in
rotationally constrained convection because the presence of rotation tends to
favor convective modes with higher azimuthal wavenumber (high-m banana
cells).

However, due to the spherical symmetry of the equations, the orientation
of this dipole mode should be random; there is no particular reason for it to
be nearly perpendicular to the rotation axis as it is in both cases highlighted
in Fig. 3 (see also Fig. 4 below). This may be a coincidence; other simula-
tions (not shown here) do exhibit a wide range of orientations for the dipole
mode. However, it’s also possible that the numerical grid introduces a slight
symmetry breaking that is enough to inﬂuence the orientation of the dipole
mode. In any case, we do not expect the orientation of the dipole mode to
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence our results. The faint horizontal striping pattern in
Fig. 3 appears to be an artifact arising from the python plotting program; it
is not present in the raw data (before the Molleweide projection).

If ν is decreased along with κ, this also leads to a ﬂow that appears more
turbulent. This can be seen by comparing the left panel of Fig. 4 to Fig.
2 and the right panel of Fig. 4 to Fig. 3. This greater level of turbulence
is usually attributed to an increase of the Rayleigh number, which scales as
(νκ)−1 (FH16).

The apparent increase in the level of turbulence for cases with lower dis-

13

Figure 3: Speciﬁc entropy snapshots at r = 0.83 for (Left) Case C1 and (Right) Case
C4 (Molleweide projection). Red and blue colors denote higher and lower entropy, as
indicated by the color bars (saturation values given in erg g−1 K−1).

sipation also suggests a greater convective amplitude, U . However, in Fig. 5
we see that this is not necessarily the case. In the left panel we have plotted
the root mean square (rms) value of the convective velocity versus 1/κ for
the C series of simulations. We use this rms velocity as a measure of U .
The results for ﬁxed Pr agree with those presented by FH16 and show U
increasing toward a constant value as κ is decreased. However, the results
for ﬁxed ν show a decrease in U with decreasing κ.

The level of turbulence is typically quantiﬁed by the Reynolds number,
Re = U L/ν, where L is a characteristic length scale of the ﬂow. If we take
L to be the depth of the layer, then a decrease of U at ﬁxed ν also implies
a decrease in Re. This conclusion also holds if we use a more meaningful
measure of the turbulent length scale L, such as the integral scale of the ﬂow
or the Taylor microscale. Either of these measures would imply a decrease in
L with decreasing κ, further reducing Re. This can be veriﬁed by considering
the power spectra shown in the right panel of Fig. 5. As κ decreases the power
spectrum shifts toward higher values of the wave number ((cid:96)). This indicates
smaller eddies, which in turn implies a decrease in L.

Thus, we arrive at the somewhat surprising conclusion that the ﬂow at
low values of κ and ﬁxed ν is actually less turbulent (in the sense of smaller
Re), despite its more intricate, smaller-scale structure, and higher Rayleigh
number.

14

Figure 4: Snapshots of (left) the radial velocity at r = 0.93R and (right) the speciﬁc
entropy at r = 0.83R for Case C6 (κ = ν = 4 × 1012 cm2 s−1). Color bars are as in Figs.
2 and 3.

Figure 5: (Left) rms velocity for diﬀerent values of κ in Cases C1 through C7. The solid
blue line shows the rms velocity versus 1/κ for ﬁxed ν (C1, C2, C3, C4) and the dashed
red line shows the rms velocity versus 1/κ for ﬁxed Pr (C1, C5, C6, C7). (Right) The
velocity power spectrum (units cm2 s−2) at r = 0.93R for Cases (red dashed) C1, (blue
boxes) C3, and (green triangles) C4 (κ = 8, 4, and 2 ×1012 cm2 s−1 respectively), versus
spherical harmonic degree.

15

4. Heat Transport by Small-Scale Surface Convection

Since the entropy ﬂuctuations responsible for the buoyant driving of con-
vection originate mainly in the upper thermal boundary layer, one might
expect convective velocity amplitudes to be sensitive to the details of how
this region is modeled (see §5). In the Sun, heat transport in the outer 10
Mm of the convection zone (r > 0.98) is dominated by relatively small-scale
convective motions ranging in size from about 1-2 Mm (granulation) to about
30-35 Mm (supergranulation). Near the solar photosphere, convective trans-
port transitions to radiative heat transport that carries energy away from the
solar surface and into interplanetary space. No existing global solar convec-
tion simulation has the spatial resolution, temporal resolution, and physical
ingredients (radiative transfer, non-ideal equation of state, compressibility)
to realistically capture the complex dynamics in this outermost region of the
Sun. So, we must rely on modeling.
The approach we have taken for the simulations presented in §3 parallels
that taken by many previous studies, dating back to the pioneering work of
Gilman (1983) and Glatzmaier (1985); see Miesch (2005) and Jones et al.
(2011) for further references and discussion. In particular, we modeled the
heat ﬂux by unresolved, small-scale convection in the near surface layers
as a turbulent thermal diﬀusion, Fc, that operates on the entropy gradient
as opposed to the temperature gradient (see eqs. 5 and 15). This mimics
the tendency for eﬃcient convection to mix entropy, establishing a nearly
adiabatic stratiﬁcation.

Though physically justiﬁed, the representation of subgrid-scale (SGS) heat
transport as a thermal conduction is an approximation that needs to be
evaluated. One consequence of this model is that it ties the SGS heat ﬂux to
the background entropy gradient, ∂S/∂r, which has important implications
for the overall dynamics of the convection zone (see §5).

In order to assess these implications further, we have initiated another
series of simulations with a diﬀerent model for the SGS heat ﬂux in the
surface layers. This model consists of an imposed radial heat ﬂux, Fg, that
is independent of the background stratiﬁcation and the convective ﬂow ﬁeld.
Its functional form is given by

1 + tanh

.

(17)

(cid:18) L

(cid:19)(cid:18)

Fg =

a
2

4πr2

(cid:20) r − rg

(cid:21)(cid:19)

dg

If the parameter a is set to unity, then this formulation stipulates that Fg
will carry the entire solar luminosity L in the region rg (cid:46) r ≤ ro. For r (cid:28) rg,

16

Figure 6: (Left) Similar to the left panel of Fig. 1, but for Case G3. However, here the
contribution from Fg has been combined with the radiative ﬂux Fr, so the solid blue
curve represents Fr + Fg. (Right) Similar to the right panel of Fig. 1 but for cases (blue)
G1, (green) G2, (red) G3, and (tiel) G4. Here the magnitude of S at the top boundary
decreases systematically with decreasing κ.

Fg → 0. The width of the transition at r = rg is governed by the parameter
dg. Here we use rg = 0.90R and dg = (ro − ri)/30.
For this series of simulations, which we refer to as the G series (Fg (cid:54)= 0),
we also use a diﬀerent upper thermal boundary condition. Instead of ﬁxing S
as in the C series, we ﬁx the entropy gradient ∂S/∂r at a value of −2× 10−6
cm K−1 s−2. Since we do not zero out κ, this implies that we we still have
a nonzero thermal conduction, Fc, that contributes to the heat ﬂux through
the top boundary. However, since ∂S/∂r is ﬁxed, Fc(r = ro) → 0 as κ → 0.
This brings us to the signiﬁcance of the parameter a. This is an amplitude
factor that we adjust to ensure that the total ﬂux through the outer boundary
(r = ro) is equal to the solar ﬂux; Fg(r = ro) + Fc(r = ro) = L(cid:12)/(4πr2
o).
As κ → 0, more of the ﬂux through the boundary must be carried by Fg, so
a → 1. However, for the values of κ considered here, the contribution from
Fc is still signiﬁcant, implying 0 < a < 1.

This is illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 6, which shows the ﬂux balance
for Case G3. Here, Fc transports about 28% of the solar luminosity through
the surface, leaving about 72% to be carried by Fg (a ≈ 0.72). The right
panel shows the resulting entropy stratiﬁcation. Here the spread in ∆S is
smaller than in the C series and shows an opposite trend, decreasing slightly
with decreasing κ instead of increasing. Furthermore, unlike the C series,

17

Figure 7: (Left) As in Fig. 5 but including results from all fourteen simulations (C series
and G series), with and without the granulation ﬂux Fg. Solid blue and dashed red lines
are as in Fig. 5. Their counterparts for nonzero Fg are indicated by the dash-dotted green
(G1, G2, G3, G4) and dotted purple (G1, G5, G6, G7) lines.
(Right) Velocity power
spectrum at r = 0.93R for Cases C2 (blue squares) and G2 (red triangles). The units are
cm2 s−2.

the entropy proﬁle in the G series will become independent of κ in the limit
κ → 0.

Remarkably, even with this very diﬀerent treatment of the upper boundary
layer, the results are similar. This is demonstrated for the rms velocity
amplitude in the left panel of Fig. 7. Though the velocity amplitudes are
systematically higher in the G series of simulations, the trends are similar to
the C series. In particular, U decreases with decreasing κ if ν is held ﬁxed
but increases and asympotes toward a constant value if Pr is held ﬁxed. The
velocity spectra are also similar, though somewhat steeper in the G series
(Fig. 7, right panel). This can likely be attributed to the greater width of
the thermal boundary layer for nonzero Fg, which is expected to produce
wider plumes (§5).

Thus, we conclude that the results, and in particular the velocity am-
plitudes, are insensitive to the details of how the upper thermal boundary
layer is modeled. This is consistent with the high-resolution, global, non-
rotating simulations of Hotta et al. (2014). They compared several simu-
lations with diﬀerent surface cooling and diﬀerent locations for the upper
boundary, ro = 0.96R and ro = 0.99R. The latter employed an unprece-

18

dented spatial resolution in order to explicitly capture small-scale convective
motions near the surface (though even this simulation did not have enough
resolution to extend the convective spectrum all the way down to granu-
lation). They found that various measures of the velocity ﬁeld in the mid
convection zone, including the velocity amplitude and spectrum, were similar
in the diﬀerent cases considered and thus insensitive to the detailed structure
and dynamics of the upper boundary layer.

5. Discussion

When interpreting our results, we must keep in mind the target parameter
regime. As discussed in §4, the conductive ﬂux Fc is a model that is intended
to represent SGS convection in the solar surface layers. As such, there is no
value of κ that corresponds to the microphysical (plasma) thermal diﬀusion
in the actual Sun. However, there is a thermal diﬀusion due to radiative heat
transport (modeled here implicitly by Q), which is proportional to κr∇T .
Thus, we may loosely take the value of κr ∼ 107 cm2 s−1 as our target
value for the eﬀective κ in the Sun. Since the values of κ used here are on
the order of 1012-1013 cm2 s−1, we would need to decrease κ by about 5-6
orders of magnitude to approach the actual thermal diﬀusion of the Sun.
The molecular viscosity, ν, in the Sun is even smaller, on the order of 1 cm2
s−1 (Miesch, 2005). So, in order to achieve the true microphysical plasma
viscosity of the Sun, we would have to decrease ν by about 12-13 orders
of magnitude. So, based on the microphysics of the solar plasma, Pr (cid:28) 1.
However, as we will argue in §6, the eﬀective viscosity of the solar plasma
may be much higher, potentially placing the Sun in a high-Pr regime.

This justiﬁes our two paths in parameter space. We seek to understand
the behavior of the system as we decrease κ to approach more solar-like
parameter regimes. However, we ﬁnd that this behavior depends on whether
or not we simultaneously decrease ν as well.

Within this context, the aim of this section is to understand and interpret

the principle result of Section 3, namely that:

• R1: U decreases with decreasing κ if ν is held ﬁxed.

where U is the characteristic velocity amplitude of the convection. If this
result holds up then it bodes well for global solar convection simulations, that
employ an artiﬁcially large value of κ and that appear to be overestimating
U (§1).

19

While we are addressing this principle result, we will also address the other
results discussed in sections 3 and 4, which may be summarized as follows:
• R2: U initially increases with decreasing κ if Pr is held ﬁxed, asymp-
totically approaching a constant value as κ → 0. This result was
previously reported by FH16.

• R3: R1 and R2 still apply if the conductive heat ﬂux through the top
boundary is (partially) replaced by a ﬁxed heat ﬂux designed to mimic
small-scale surface convection.

Note that the range of κ spanned by the simulations presented here is
insuﬃcient to provide a robust characterization of the trend found in R1. In
particular, the dependence appears roughly linear (Fig. 7), but we cannot rule
out other power law exponents or functional relationships. Similar caveats
apply to R3. By contrast, R2 has indeed been thoroughly and robustly
characterized by FH16.

5.1. Rayleigh-B´enard (RB) Convection

To provide context for understanding results R1 and R2 it is instructive
to consider the most well-studied manifestation of thermal convection in the
literature, namely Rayleigh-B´enard (RB) convection. The physical system
consists of a Boussinesq ﬂuid (no density stratiﬁcation) between two semi-
inﬁnite horizontal plates at ﬁxed temperature (Chandrasekhar, 1961; Gastine
et al., 2015). The mathematical system can be completely speciﬁed by two
nondimensional numbers, namely the Rayleigh number Ra and the Prandtl
In the Boussinesq limit, Ra = αgD3∆/(κν), where α is the
number, Pr.
thermal expansion coeﬃcient, g is the gravitational acceleration, D is the
distance between the plates, and ∆ is the imposed temperature diﬀerence.

The characteristic convective velocity scale, U , is typically expressed nondi-
mensionally as the Reynolds number Re = U D/ν. Whereas Ra and Pr are
system parameters, Re is a diagnostic output of the numerical or laboratory
experiment and, for Ra >> 1, it is found to scale as

Re ∝ Ra

a P b
r

(18)

If the thermal boundary layer is thinner than the viscous boundary layer
(Pr (cid:38) 0.1) and if it is assumed that there is a local force balance between
buoyancy and advection in each convective plume, then the basic mixing

20

length theory suggests a = 4/9 and b = −2/3 (Siggia, 1994). However, more
sophisticated theories and laboratory experiments paint a more complex pic-
ture, with multiple parameter regimes determined by the spatial distribution
of the thermal and viscous dissipation and the relative widths of the corre-
sponding boundary layers (Ahlers et al., 2009; Gastine et al., 2015). Still,
in all of these regimes, a > 0 and b < 0, implying that Re increases with
increasing Ra and decreases with increasing Pr.

This qualitative scaling is straightforward to interpret. For ﬁxed Pr, in-
creasing Ra by, for example, increasing the temperature diﬀerence or de-
creasing the diﬀusion, will cause the ﬂow to become more turbulent (larger
Re). Meanwhile, increasing Pr while keeping Ra ﬁxed implies that the ﬂow
becomes more viscous (larger ν) and laminar (smaller Re). However, the
dimensional scaling is more subtle. Dimensionally, eq. (18) implies

U ∝ ν1−a+b κ−(a+b) = P 1−a+b

r

κ1−2a

.

(19)

So, for ﬁxed ν, U decreases with decreasing κ (R1) only if a + b < 0. This
is indeed the case for the mixing length estimate quoted above and for most
of the parameter regimes described by Ahlers et al. (2009). Meanwhile, U
becomes independent of κ at ﬁxed Pr (R2) if a = 1/2. The above estimate
of a = 4/9 is less than 1/2 so in this scaling regime, U would decrease
with decreasing κ, in contrast with result R2. However, for Pr ∼ 1 − 10
and Ra ∼ 105-107, the more comprehensive analysis by Ahlers et al. (2009)
suggests values of a that are indeed equal to 1/2. So the scaling laws quoted
in the literature for RB convection are at least qualitatively consistent with
our results R1 and R2.

However, a more careful consideration of the underlying physics suggests
that the trends we are seeing (relevant for solar convection) are fundamen-
tally diﬀerent that the trends previously found for RB convection. In RB
convection, the decrease of U with decreasing κ for ﬁxed ν (R1) is accom-
panied by a decrease in the heat ﬂux through the layer, as quantiﬁed by
the Nusselt number Nu (Siggia, 1994; Ahlers et al., 2009). Conversely, an
increase in U is generally accompanied by an increase in the heat ﬂux. By
contrast, the heat ﬂux in our simulations, and in the Sun, is ﬁxed by the solar
luminosity. We will address this fundamental diﬀerence and its implications
in §5.2.

In the RB case, the decrease of U for decreasing κ at ﬁxed ν (R1) can
be attributed to what we concisely refer to hereafter as a shift in the

21

power spectrum. In RB convection, as in the simulations presented here,
the characteristic width of convective plumes is roughly determined by the
thickness of the thermal boundary layer which scales approximately as κ1/2
(Ahlers et al., 2009, FH16). As κ decreases, the thermal boundary layer
becomes thinner and the plumes become narrower, shifting the entire power
spectrum toward higher wavenumber. At ﬁxed ν, this enhances the viscous
dissipation. It also enhances the turbulent entrainment of surrounding ﬂuid,
suppressing the buoyant driving. The result is a decrease in both U (R1)
and the heat ﬂux, Nu.

However, if ν is decreased in pace with κ (ﬁxed Pr), then the viscous
dissipation can be held in check. Now one might expect U to be determined
by the potential energy available in the upper boundary layer; see FH16 and
§5.4 below. Note that the shift in the power spectrum and in the buoyancy
work toward higher wavenumbers as κ is decreased has been demonstrated by
FH16. However, since this is achieved by means of a ﬁxed-Pr path through
parameter space, this shift is not associated with a signiﬁcant increase in the
viscous dissipation.

5.2. The Luminosity Constraint

In section 5.1 we identiﬁed one possible explanation for result R1, namely
a shift in the power spectrum toward higher wavenumber that leads to en-
hanced viscous dissipation for a ﬁxed value of ν. Here we identify two more
possible explanations which refer to concisely hereafter as the Peclet num-
ber eﬀect and the raising of the adiabat. Both of these are linked to
the requirement that the convection carry a ﬁxed solar luminosity. As such,
they have no counterpart in classical RB convection where the convective
heat ﬂux varies in general with the dissipation (§5.1).

In our numerical experiments, as in the Sun, a ﬁxed heat ﬂux enters the
convection zone from below by means of radiative diﬀusion. We express this
as a radiative heat ﬂux Fr that is determined by the heating function Q (Q
is equal to the divergence of Fr; see eq. 12). This radiative heat ﬂux is the
same for each simulation and sets the value of the luminosity that passes
through the entire computational domain in equilibrium.
In the mid CZ, the solar luminosity is carried mainly by the convective en-
thalpy ﬂux, Fe ∝ T vr (see Figs. 1 and 6 and eq. 13). Here T may be regarded
as the temperature deﬁcit of a downward plume relative to its surroundings.
This is because the dominant source of thermal ﬂuctuations is the upper
thermal boundary layer (as we will argue in the ensuing discussion in this

22

section). If these downward plumes are in pressure equilibrium with their
surroundings, then T ∼ T δp/Cp, where δp is the entropy deﬁcit in the plume.
In particular, we can set δp = (cid:104)S(cid:105) − Sp, where (cid:104)S(cid:105) is the mean entropy gra-
dient and Sp is the speciﬁc entropy of a typical cool, downﬂow plume. Both
(cid:104)S(cid:105) and Sp will in general depend on radius but in what follows we will be
concerned with the value of δp in the mid CZ. Thus, if we equate vr with
U and if require that the convective enthalpy ﬂux must transport the solar
luminosity through the mid CZ (neglecting the relatively small contribution
from the inward kinetic energy ﬂux), then we must have

U ∝ L(cid:12)
δp

.

(20)

Since L(cid:12) is the same for every simulation at all times, U must scale inversely
with δp.
Thus, in order to understand results R1, R2, and R3, we must understand
the factors that determine δp. To this end, we consider the (cid:104)S(cid:105) curves shown
in Fig. 1 (right). Given our ﬁxed entropy upper boundary condition in the C
simulations, downward plumes that emanate from the upper boundary layer
will be endowed with a speciﬁc entropy of S = 0 relative to the background
state. If they retain this speciﬁc entropy endowment as they travel downward
into the mid CZ, then Sp ≈ 0. Meanwhile, the background entropy (cid:104)S(cid:105) in the
mid CZ is approximately equal to the entropy contrast across the entire CZ,
∆S. This is due both to the eﬃcient mixing of entropy by the convection,
which minimizes ∂S/∂r apart from the upper boundary layer, and to the
lower boundary condition of ∂S/∂r = 0, which can be used to deﬁne the
base of the CZ1 (note that ∂S/∂r = 0 at the base of the solar CZ as well).
Now the signiﬁcance of the downﬂow plumes in determining δp (and T (cid:48))
becomes clear. A plume that begins in the upper boundary layer and travels
downward to the mid CZ will have an entropy deﬁcit δp that is comparable
to ∆S. By comparison, ﬂuid ﬂowing up from the lower boundary is nearly
isentropic (S ∼ (cid:104)S(cid:105)) and most of it overturns before it ever reaches the mid
CZ as a consequence of the density stratiﬁcation. This a characteristic feature
of compressible convection (Spruit et al., 1990; Miesch, 2005; Nordlund et al.,
2009).

1The base of the CZ may also be deﬁned as the radius where the convective heat ﬂux
crosses zero. With this alternative deﬁnition, the point where ∂S/∂r = 0 may not precisely
coincide with the base of the CZ but this distinction is irrelevant here.

23

We can generalize this picture by writing δp = β∆S, where β is a number
between zero and one that quantiﬁes how well downﬂow plumes can hold on
to the speciﬁc entropy deﬁcit bequeathed to them in the upper boundary
layer. For example, if κ is large, then the thermal content of plumes will
diﬀuse away before they make it to the mid CZ. This would yield a value
of β close to zero and ineﬃcient convective heat transport regardless of the
value of ∆S. The relevant nondimensional number here is the Peclet number,
which we deﬁne here as Pe = U d2
t /(κD), where dt is the width of the thermal
boundary layer (equal to the horizontal width of a plume), and D = ro −
ri is the depth of the CZ. In the limit Pe (cid:29) 1, plumes will be able to
retain their thermal variations with negligible diﬀusive losses. However, this
does not necessarily imply values of β close to unity. Other factors also
contribute to β, most notably the density stratiﬁcation. As plumes travel
downward, they must entrain surrounding ﬂuid in order to maintain their
downward momentum. This dilutes their entropy content and introduces a
multiplicative contribution to β that is inversely proportional to the density
contrast between the upper and mid CZ. The value of β may also depend
on the Reynolds number, which will impact the stability of plumes and may
regulate turbulent entrainment.

For our purposes here, we will neglect these additional factors and refer
to this phenomena concisely as the Peclet number eﬀect. In short, high
values of Pe can promote low velocities U by enhancing the thermal content
of plumes, as reﬂected by an increase in the value of β. The contribution of
the density stratiﬁcation to β is important in general but not relevant here
since all simulations have the same density contrast.
If the SGS heat ﬂux in the surface layers is assumed to be diﬀusive in
nature, ∝ κ∂S/∂r as in §3, then the Peclet number eﬀect should cease to
play a role. This is because the thermal boundary layer in this case scales
as dt ∝ κ1/2, which would make the diﬀusion time across a plume, d2
t /κ
independent of κ. As the diﬀusion decreases, plumes become smaller, so
their diﬀusive losses are undiminished and their ability to carry heat across
the CZ depends only on their speed, U . Lower values of U would then imply
lower values of Pe, which would in turn lead to lower thermal variations δp.
This situation is not consistent with the luminosity constraint (20). However,
the Peclet number eﬀect likely does play a role if the width of the boundary
layer, dt, is determined by processes other than conduction, as in §4. We will
return to this issue in §5.4.
As noted in §2.2, ∆S increases for the C series of simulations as κ is

24

decreased. This is a consequence of the requirement that conduction must
carry the heat ﬂux through the upper boundary, which in turn requires that
the upper entropy gradient be ∝ κ−1 (see eq. 16). Since the width of the
thermal boundary layer, dt scales as κ1/2, this implies ∆S ∼ dt [∂S/∂r]r=ro
∝
κ−1/2. Given our thermal boundary conditions (S = 0 at top, ∂S/∂r = 0 at
bottom), this eﬀectively raises the speciﬁc entropy of the entire CZ, apart
from the upper boundary layer.

We refer to this eﬀect as the raising of the adiabat. In short, a decrease
in κ will induce a decrease in U by enhancing the thermal deﬁcit of downﬂow
plumes relative to their surroundings, δp (see eq. 20). It accomplishes this
by raising the adiabat of the CZ, enhancing ∆S.

5.3. High Prandtl Number Convection
The path in parameter space in which ν is held ﬁxed while κ is decreased
(result R1) implies increasingly high values of the Prandtl number, Pr (cid:29) 1.
Thermal convection in the regime Pr (cid:29) and Ra (cid:29) 1 has been extensively
studied in the literature within the context of mantle convection in terrestrial
planets. Notable examples include global simulations of mantle convection
that exhibit thin, coherent “superplumes” that span the entire convection
zone and dominate the heat transport (Bercovici et al., 1992; Deschamps
et al., 2010, 2012; Kronbichler et al., 2012). Similar structures have also
been observed in laboratory experiments (Davaille and Limare, 2007). Fur-
thermore, there is some evidence from seismic imaging that such superplumes
do in fact exist in the Earth’s mantle (e.g. Romanowicz and Gung, 2002).

It has been suggested by Spruit (1997) and Hanasoge et al. (2016) that
thin, coherent plumes roughly analogous to mantle superplumes may also
exist in the solar convection zone, and may help resolve the convective co-
nundrum. This is an intriguing possibility that warrants further study. It
would be roughly consistent with the scenarios advocated here, in which heat
transport is dominated by coherent plumes characterized by high Peclet num-
bers and thus large thermal contrasts relative to the background (cf. eq. 20).
However, it must be remembered that mantle convection is far diﬀerent
from stellar convection. In particular, the ﬂow is nearly incompressible and
highly viscous, characterized by Reynolds numbers much less than unity (in
stars Re (cid:29) 1). Furthermore, large variations in viscosity, thermal conduc-
tivity, and the thermal expansion coeﬃcient are all thought to play an im-
portant role in the formation of terrestrial superplumes (Zhang et al., 1997;
Yuen et al., 2007).

25

Figure 8: (Left) Probability density function (pdf) of speciﬁc entropy variations S − (cid:104)S(cid:105)
at r = 0.83R for Cases (blue) C1, (green) C3, and (red) C4. (Right) As left, but for cases
that include the imposed granulation ﬂux Fg, namely (blue) G1, (green) G3, and (red) G4.
For those viewing a black and white version, cases C1 and G1 have the shortest negative
range, extending only to ∼ −1500 erg K−1 g−1 while Cases C4 and G4 extend furthest to
the left and right (widest range).

5.4. Assessment

We opened this section (§5) with the motivation of understanding result
R1; why does U decrease with decreasing κ if ν is held ﬁxed? In §5.1–5.2
we oﬀered three potential reasons: (1) a shift in the power spectrum (toward
higher wavenumbers), (2) the Peclet number eﬀect, and (3) the raising of the
adiabat. Only the ﬁrst applies to the well-studied problem of RB convection,
the other two arising from the constraint that the convection must carry out
the solar luminosity.

Which eﬀect is dominant? This is addressed by Figure 8, which shows the
distribution of entropy ﬂuctuations in the mid CZ for several cases from sec-
tion 3 on the constant-ν track through parameter space. This demonstrates
an increase in the entropy deﬁcit in cool downﬂows, δp, as κ is decreased.
Since (2) the Peclet number eﬀect is expected to be ineﬀective for these cases
with a conductive SGS heat ﬂux (see §5.2), we attribute the decrease in U
with decreasing κ (R1) mainly to (3) the raising of the adiabat.

Then what of R2? Why does the raising of the adiabat become ineﬀec-
tive for the ﬁxed-Pr path through parameter space? We attribute this to
the lower value of ν, which may destabilize plumes and increase turbulent
entrainment. Recall from section 3 that the eﬀective Re of the ﬂow increases
with decreasing κ on this path, in contrast to the ﬁxed-ν path where the lam-
inarization of plumes (lower Re) may promote more eﬃcient heat transport.

26

As plumes lose coherence on the ﬁxed-Pr path, the kinetic energy imparted
to convection is determined not by the thermal content of individual ﬂow
structures, but by the net potential energy available to sustain the convec-
tion, which scales as ∆S dt (FH16). As ∆S increases (∝ κ−1/2), the thermal
boundary layer thins (dt ∝ κ1/2) so that the potential energy available to
sustain convection becomes independent of κ. The result is that U becomes
independent of dissipation, as was demonstrated by FH16 for Pr = 1.

It may be argued that eﬀects (3) and possibly (1) are artiﬁcial in that
they depend on our representation of unresolved near-surface convection as
a conductive heat ﬂux proportional to κ∂S/∂r. However, it is clear that
our simulations do underestimate ∆S and over-estimate the thickness of the
thermal boundary layer, dt, relative to the actual Sun. So, we expect that the
trends identiﬁed here will still be relevant even if the nature of the subgrid-
scale heat transport is non-diﬀusive.
This expectation is borne out by the results presented in §4 (result R3).
Here we partially replaced the conductive SGS heat ﬂux with a ﬁxed heat
ﬂux that is independent of both κ and ∂S/∂r, in the limit of small κ. The
results were similar to the conductive case (results R1 and R2). However,
this cannot be attributed to the raising of the adiabat because in these G
cases ∆S does not increase with decreasing κ (Fig. 6). Yet, the thermal
ﬂuctuations are still enhanced in the low-κ limit, as shown in Fig. 8. This
points to (2) the Peclet number eﬀect as the likely culprit. As in the C series,
these eﬀects are suppressed in the constant-Pr path through parameter space
as the ﬂow becomes more turbulent (higher Re) and plumes lose coherence.
We intend to explore these conclusions more thoroughly in the future with
higher-resolution simulations that achieve low enough values of κ that the
conductive heat ﬂux through the outer surface becomes negligible. In this
regime, eﬀects (1) and (3), namely the shift of the power spectrum and the
raising of the adiabat, should cease to play a role because they depend on the
structure of the boundary layer, which will become essentially independent
of κ. However, the Peclet number eﬀect (2) should become more important
in this regime, as noted in §5.2. This is because the width of the plumes
should become independent of κ and Pe should scale as κ−1.

It is worth emphasizing explicitly that all three eﬀects should saturate
at very low values of κ, approaching a regime where U becomes indepen-
dent of dissipation (κ and ν). For (2) the Peclet number eﬀect, this occurs
when Pe (cid:29) 1 and thermal diﬀusion across plumes becomes negligible. For
(1) the shifting of the power spectrum and (3) the raising of the adiabat,

27

saturation should occur when dt approaches the actual depth of the photo-
spheric boundary layer in the Sun. Simulations of surface convection suggest
that this is on the order of 100 km, if deﬁned as where the buoyancy driv-
ing occurs (Nordlund et al., 2009). However, ∆S may be established over
a slightly wider region, possibly as much as 1 Mm (e.g. Lord et al., 2014).
This suggests that, dt is only about 1-2 orders of magnitude thinner than in
the highest-resolution simulations considered here. Thus, extrapolating the
scaling relationship dt ∝ κ1/2 six orders of magnitude or more in κ would
yield boundary layer widths that are unrealistically thin (FH16).

It is also worth noting that in any asymptotic regime in which U becomes
independent of dissipation, then the mean entropy deﬁcit in plumes, δp will
also become independent of dissipation. This follows from eq. (20).

6. Summary and Implications

In this paper we have argued that, if solar convection can operate in a
high Prandtl number regime, then this may help alleviate the convective
conundrum (Sec. 1). This has also been argued by Hotta et al. (2015b).

In particular, we have conducted a series of non-rotating, global solar con-
vection simulations with progressively smaller values of the thermal diﬀusion,
κ, in order to approach the solar parameter regime. If ν is held ﬁxed as we
decrease κ (corresponding to Pr > 1), we ﬁnd that the amplitude of the con-
vective velocity U systematically decreases (results R1, R3 in §5). For the
cases considered in Section 3 (Fg = 0), we attribute this to an increase in
the entropy contrast across the CZ, ∆S, which enhances the entropy deﬁcit
in cool, downﬂow plumes. Larger entropy variations in turn implies that the
convection can carry the imposed solar luminosity with smaller ﬂow speeds.
We expect this behavior to saturate when the true ∆S of the solar convection
zone is reached, after which U should become independent of κ.

An increase in the eﬀective Peclet number can also help reduce U by
enhancing thermal ﬂuctuations in the mid CZ. However, we argue that this
should only play a role if the modeled SGS heat ﬂux associated with small-
scale surface convection is non-diﬀusive (§5.4). For a diﬀusive (conductive)
heat ﬂux, the width of plumes becomes narrower as κ is decreased so diﬀusive
losses remain undiminished as the thermal diﬀusivity is reduced. For a non-
diﬀusive SGS heat ﬂux, we expect that U will become independent of κ when
Pe (cid:29) 1. These mechanisms for regulating U are distinct from the well-studied
problem of Rayleigh-B´enard convection because they are intimately linked

28

to the requirement that the convection must carry out the solar luminosity
(§5.2).

We ﬁnd that if we decrease ν as we decrease κ (ﬁxing Pr), the results are
less favorable from the perspective of the convection conundrum, but still
promising. In particular, as κ is decreased, U asymptotes to a constant value
that is independent of κ (result R2 of §5), as found in the more comprehensive
study of FH16.

We emphasize again that the simulations reported here are non-rotating.
Further work needs to be done to determine whether our results persist for
simulations that include rotation or whether other mechanisms for regulating
U might be present. If they do persist, this raises the question of: Why might
solar convection operate in a high Pr regime?

A plausible answer is small-scale magnetism. Hotta et al. (2015b) have re-
cently shown that magnetic ﬁelds generated by small-scale dynamo action in
high-resolution solar convection simulations can simultaneously inhibit shear
and reduce turbulent mixing of entropy ﬂuctuations in downﬂow plumes. In
other words, the eﬀective viscosity ν is enhanced and the eﬀective thermal
diﬀusion κ is reduced, implying an eﬀective value of Pr that is greater than
one. Furthermore, as the resolution is increased, Hotta et al. (2015b) argue
that the small-scale magnetic energy should saturate, approaching a value
that is close to the equipartition value associated with the kinetic energy of
the convection. Thus, one might expect the eﬀective ν to remain constant
as the explicit SGS thermal diﬀusion (represented by κ) is decreased. This
provides some justiﬁcation for our ﬁxed-ν path through parameter space.

The conclusion that small-scale magnetism can act as an eﬀective viscos-
ity is also supported by a number of global convection simulations (Brun
et al., 2004; Nelson et al., 2013; Fan and Fang, 2014; Karak et al., 2015). In
particular, Fan and Fang (2014) and Karak et al. (2015) demonstrate that
the suppression of small-scale shear by magnetism can modify the transition
from solar to anti-solar diﬀerential rotation discussed in Sec. 1, shifting it to-
ward higher Rossby numbers. In other words, the inclusion of magnetism can
promote solar-like diﬀerential rotation in a simulation that would otherwise
be anti-solar.

Though promising, these results must still be considered speculative; more
work is needed to determine whether or not solar convection eﬀectively op-
erates in the high-Pr regime and if so, whether or not this can solve the
convection conundrum.

We thank Ben Brown, Sacha Brun, Brad Hindman, Hideyuki Hotta, Bidya

29

Karak, Mark Rast, and Matthias Rempel for many enlightening discussions
on the issues covered here and we thank the anonymous referees for helpful
comments on the manuscript. This research is supported by NASA grant
NNX13AG18G. O’Mara was supported by the Research Experience for Un-
dergraduates (REU) program at University of Colorado’s Laboratory for At-
mospheric and Space Physics (LASP) and by a research stipend from Regis
University. Featherstone and the development of Rayleigh were supported
by the Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics (CIG), which is sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation award NSF-094946. This work
used computational resources provided through NASA HEC support on the
Pleiades supercomputer in conjunction with NASA grant NNX14AC05G.
NCAR is sponsored by the National Science Foundation.

References

Ahlers, G., Grossmann, S., Lohse, D., 2009. Heat transfer and large scale
dynamics in turbulent rayleigh-b´enard convection. Reviews of Modern
Physics 81, 503–537.

Augustson, K.C., Brun, A.S., Miesch, M.S., Toomre, J., 2015. Grand minima
and equatorward propagation in a cycling stellar convective dynamo. ApJ
809, 149 (25pp).

Bercovici, D., Schubert, G., Glatzmaier, G.A., 1992. Three-dimensional con-
vection of an inﬁnite-prandtl-number compressible ﬂuid in a basally heated
spherical shell. J. Fluid Mech. 239, 683–719.

Brun, A.S., Miesch, M.S., Toomre, J., 2004. Global-scale turbulent convec-
tion and magnetic dynamo action in the solar envelope. ApJ 614, 1073–
1098.

Chandrasekhar, S., 1961. Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic Stability. Ox-

ford University Press, Oxford.

Chapman, C.J., Proctor, M.R.E., 1980. Nonlinear rayleigh b´enard convection

between poorly conducting boundaries. J. Fluid Mech. 101, 759–782.

Charbonneau, P., 2010. Dynamo models of the solar cycle. Living Reviews

in Solar Physics 7. Http://www.livingreviews.org/lrsp-2010-3.

30

Clune, T.C., Elliott, J.R., Miesch, M.S., Toomre, J., Glatzmaier, G.A., 1999.
Computational aspects of a code to study rotating turbulent convection in
spherical shells. Parallel Computing 25, 361–380.

Davaille, A., Limare, A., 2007. Laboratory Studies of Mantle Convection.
Treatise on Geophysics, Volume 7: Mantle Dynamics, second edition, chap-
ter 3. Elsevier, Amsterdam. pp. 89–165

Depassier, M.C., Spiegel, E.A., 1981. The large-scale structure of compress-

ible convection. Astronom. J. 86, 496–512.

Deschamps, F., Tackley, P.J., Nakagawa, T., 2010. Temperature and heat ﬂux
scalings for isoviscous thermal convection in spherical geometry. Geophys.
J. Int. 182, 137–154.

Deschamps, F., Yao, C., Tackley, P.J., Sanchez-Valle, C., 2012. High rayleigh
number thermal convection in volumetrically heated spherical shells. J.
Geophys. Res. 117, E09006.

Fan, Y., Fang, F., 2014. A simulation of convective dynamo in the solar
convective envelope: Maintenance of the solar-like diﬀerential rotation and
emerging ﬂux. ApJ 789, 35 (13pp).

Featherstone, N.A., Hindman, B.W., 2016. The spectral amplitude of stellar
convection and its scaling in the high-rayleigh-number regime. Astrophys.
J., submitted.

Featherstone, N.A., Miesch, M.S., 2015. Meridional circulation in solar and

stellar convection zones. ApJ 804, 67 (21pp).

Gastine, T., Wicht, J., Aurnou, J.M., 2015. Turbulent rayleigh-b´enard con-

vection in spherical shells. J. Fluid Mech. 778, 721–764.

Gastine, T., Yadav, R.K., Morin, J., Reiners, A., Wicht, J., 2014. From
solar-like to anti-solar diﬀerential rotation in cool stars. MNRAS 438,
L76–L80.

Gilman, P.A., 1983. Dynamically consistent nonlinear dynamos driven by
convection in a rotating spherical shell ii. dynamos with cycles and strong
feedbacks. ApJSS 53, 243–268.

31

Gilman, P.A., Glatzmaier, G.A., 1981. Compressible convection in a rotating

spherical shell. i. anelastic equations. ApJSS 45, 335–349.

Glatzmaier, G.A., 1985. Numerical simulations of stellar convective dynamos.

ii. ﬁeld propogation in the convection zone. ApJ 291, 300–307.

Gough, D.O., 1969. The anelastic approximation for thermal convection. J.

Atmos. Sci. 26, 448–456.

Greer, B.J., Hindman, B.W., Featherstone, N.A., Toomre, J., 2015. Helio-
seismic imaging of fast convective ﬂows throughout the near-surface shear
layer. ApJ 803, L17 (5pp).

Guerrero, G., Smolarkiewicz, P.K., Kosovichev, A.G., Mansour, N.N., 2013.
Diﬀerential rotation in solar-like stars from global simulations. ApJ 779,
176 (13pp).

Hanasoge, S.M., Duvall, T., DeRosa, M.L., 2010. Seismic constraints on

interior solar convection. ApJL 712, L98–L102.

Hanasoge, S.M., Duvall, T., Sreenivasan, K.R., 2012.

Anamolously
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 109, 11928–11932,

weak solar convection.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1206570109.

Hanasoge, S.M., Gizon, L., Sreenivasan, K.R., 2016. Seismic sounding of

convection in the sun. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 48, 191–217.

Hotta, H., Rempel, M., Yokoyama, T., 2014. High-resolution calculations of
the solar global convection with the reduced speed of sound technique. i.
the structure of the convection and the magnetic ﬁeld without the rotation.
ApJ 786, 24 (18pp).

Hotta, H., Rempel, M., Yokoyama, T., 2015a. High-resolution calculations
of the solar global convection with the reduced speed of sound technique.
ii. near surface shear layer with the rotation. ApJ 798, 51 (15pp).

Hotta, H., Rempel, M., Yokoyama, T., 2015b. Eﬃcient small-scale dynamo

action in the solar convection zone. ApJ 803, 42 (14pp).

Jones, C.A., Boronski, P., Brun, A.S., Glatzmaier, G.A., Gastine, T., Miesch,
M.S., Wicht, J., 2011. Anelastic convection-driven dynamo benchmarks.
Icarus 216, 120–135.

32

K¨apyl¨a, P.J., K¨apyl¨a, M.J., Brandenburg, A., 2014. Conﬁrmation of bistable

stellar diﬀerential rotation proﬁles. A&A 570, A43 (10pp).

Karak, B.B., K¨apyl¨a, P.J., K¨apyl¨a, M.J., Brandenburg, A., Olspert, N., Pelt,
J., 2015. Magnetically controlled stellar diﬀerential rotation near the tran-
sition from solar to anti-solar proﬁles. A&A 576, A26 (17pp).

Kronbichler, M., Heister, T., Bangerth, W., 2012. High accuracy mantle
convection simulation through modern numerical methods. Geophys. J.
Int. 191, 12–29.

Lord, J., Cameron, R., Rast, M., Rempel, M., Roudier, T., 2014. The role
of subsurface ﬂows in solar surface convection: Modeling the spectrum of
supergranular and larger scale ﬂows. ApJ 793, 24 (11pp).

Miesch, M.S.,

2005.

Large-scale dynamics
in

Living Reviews

the

of
Solar Physics

convection
2.

and

zone
Http://www.livingreviews.org/lrsp-2005-1.

tachocline.

Miesch, M.S., Featherstone, N.A., Rempel, M., Trampedach, R., 2012. On
the amplitude of convective velocities in the deep solar interior. ApJ 757,
128 (14pp).

Nelson, N.J., Brown, B.P., Brun, A.S., Miesch, M.S., Toomre, J., 2013. Mag-

netic wreathes and cycles in convective dynamos. ApJ 762, 73 (20pp).

Nordlund, A., Stein, R.F., Asplund, M., 2009. Solar surface convection.
Living Reviews in Solar Physics 6. Http://www.livingreviews.org/lrsp-
2009-2.

Racine, E., Charbonneau, P., Ghizaru, M., Bouchat, A., Smolarkiewicz, P.K.,
2011. On the mode of dynamo action in a global large-eddy simulation of
solar convection. ApJ 735, 46 (22pp).

Romanowicz, B., Gung, Y., 2002. Superplumes from the core-mantle bound-

ary to the lithosphere: Implications for heat ﬂux. Science 296, 513–516.

Siggia, E.D., 1994. High rayleigh number convection. Annu. Rev. Fluid

Mech. 26, 137–168.

Spruit, H.C., 1997. Convection in stellar envelopes: A changing paradigm.

Mem. Soc. Astr. It. 68, 397–414.

33

Spruit, H.C., Nordlund, A., Title, A.M., 1990. Solar convection. Annu. Rev.

Astron. Astrophys. 28, 263–301.

Yuen, D.A., Monnereau, M., Hansen, U., Kameyama, M., Matyska, C., 2007.
Dynamics of superplumes in the lower mantle, in: Yuen, D.A., Maruyama,
S., Karato, S.I., Windley, B.F. (Eds.), Superplumes: Beyond Plate Tec-
tonics, Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 239–267.

Zhang, J., Childress, S., Libchaber, A., 1997. Non-boussinesq eﬀect: Thermal

convection with broken symmetry. Phys. Fluids 9, 1034–1042.

34

