Distribution Statement A: Approved for public release: distribution is unlimited

Adaptive coherence estimator (ACE) for explosive hazard

detection using wideband electromagnetic induction (WEMI)

Brendan Alvey, Alina Zare, Matthew Cook, Dominic K. C. Ho

University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211

ABSTRACT

The adaptive coherence estimator (ACE) estimates the squared cosine of the angle between a known target vector
and a sample vector in a transformed coordinate space. The space is transformed according to an estimation
of the background statistics, which directly eﬀects the performance of the statistic as a target detector.
In
this paper, the ACE detection statistic is used to detect buried explosive hazards with data from a Wideband
Electromagnetic Induction (WEMI) sensor. Target signatures are based on a dictionary deﬁned using a Discrete
Spectrum of Relaxation Frequencies (DSRF) model. Results are summarized as a receiver operator curve (ROC)
and compared to other leading methods.

Keywords: ACE, Adaptive Coherence Estimator, Detection, Explosives, Hazards, Landmines, Remote Sensing,
WEMI, Wideband Electromagnetic Induction

1. INTRODUCTION

A prototype wideband electromagnetic induction (WEMI) sensor has been developed and investigated in the
literature for buried explosive object detection and discrimination.1–8 In this paper, the ACE detector is proposed
and evaluated for the detection of buried explosive objects given data from this WEMI sensor.

1.1 Background on the WEMI Sensor

The sensor used in this investigation emits energy, via a transmit coil, in the form of a time varying electromag-
netic ﬁeld. This ﬁeld causes elements below the sensor to induce their own electromagnetic ﬁeld, which is then
picked up by one or more receive coils on the sensor. The sensor operates at twenty-one logarithmically spaced
frequencies. Each sample collected by this sensor is stored as a twenty-one dimensional complex vector which
represents the measured response at each of the operating frequencies. The WEMI sensor is attached to a cart,
which also has GPS sensors attached to it to record the UTM spatial coordinates corresponding to each sample.

The data measured by the sensor is ﬁltered in the down-track direction by convolving it with a zero-mean
sine ﬁlter, as described in (Scott, 2008).1 As described by Scott, this ﬁltering has at least four beneﬁts. First,
the ground response is attenuated by diﬀerencing nearby sections of ground. For similar reasons, the drift in the
system is also mostly removed by this ﬁltering. In addition, the ﬁlter has the eﬀect of averaging nearby points
which increases the signal to noise ratio. Lastly, the ﬁltered data has a maximum response directly over targets,
rather than a minimum due to the geometry of the sensor.

In addition to ﬁltering, the data is normalized before a detection statistic is computed. Each sample is
extended to a forty-two dimensional vector by concatenating the real and imaginary responses. The real mean is
subtracted and each sample is divided by its L2 norm. This results in each data sample having unit length and
zero real mean so that scale and real shift variations may be ignored. In this paper, the detection algorithms
investigated use a dictionary of target signatures. These dictionaries undergo an identical normalization, prior
to application.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
2

 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
0
4
1
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1.2 Discrete Spectrum of Relaxation Frequencies Dictionary

Detection algorithms that leverage a dictionary of target signatures based on the Discrete Spectrum of Relaxation
Frequencies (DSRF) have been shown repeatedly in the literature to be useful for buried explosive object detection
using this WEMI sensor.3, 7, 8 This dictionary is generated from a model of the electromagnetic induction (EMI)
response of a target.9 This EMI frequency response is given by Equation 1,

L(cid:88)

H(ω) = c0 +

ck

1 + jω
ζk

k=1

(1)

where c0 is the shift, L is the model order, ck is the real spectral amplitude and ζk is the relaxation frequency.
One hundred dictionary elements are generated using relaxation frequencies logarithmically spaced from 45Hz
to 670Khz to model metallic objects. The shift is set to zero, as the real mean is relatively consistent amongst
buried objects, and thus is removed without losing much useful information. For our experiments, we populate
a dictionary of one hundred elements using the range of operating frequencies used by the WEMI sensor. This
dictionary is shown in Fig. 1.

Figure 1. Discrete Spetrum of Relaxation Frequencies (DSRF) dictionary.

1.3 Joint Orthogonal Matching Pursuits

One method which has been applied to WEMI data for the task of landmine detection previously is Joint
Orthogonal Matching Pursuits (JOMP).3, 7 JOMP is an extension of the previously formulated OMP,10 which
compares a single sample at a time to a target signature. With OMP, a sample, xj, is modeled as a sparse
linear combination of dictionary elements, D = {d1, d2, ..., dM}, described by xj = Σm
k=1wkjdk where m << M .
JOMP extends OMP to compare multiple samples simultaneously. In our application, two samples symmetrically
spaced from a central point are considered jointly at one time. This spacing is set based on the sample-rate and
average velocity of the sensor as it moves down-track. The conﬁdence value for JOMP is given by Equation 2,

cx =

1
1 + 1
n Σjrj

(2)

where rj is the residual error for the jth sample being considered where n is the total number of samples being
considered simultaneously. The residual error is deﬁned as rj = (cid:107)y − x(cid:107)2
2 where y is an original data sample
and x is the OMP reconstruction of y, deﬁned above. This gives a measure of how well the dictionary can
represent the points being considered. JOMP is more resilient to random noise than OMP because both points
must match well to the same target signature to return a high JOMP conﬁdence.

2. THE ADAPTIVE COHERENCE ESTIMATOR

The Adaptive Coherence Estimator (ACE) has been shown to be an eﬀective detection statistic.11–15ACE assumes
that a target data sample can be modeled as a linear combination of a known target signature and random
Gaussian noise. The WEMI sensor being investigated is likely to return data that closely matches this model.
ACE uses an estimate of the background mean and background covariance to transform the coordinate space
before comparing a known target vector to a data sample. The standard formulation of the ACE detection
statistic is shown in Equation (3),

ace(x) =

[(t − µ)T Σ−1(x − µ)]2

[(t − µ)T Σ−1(t − µ)][(x − µ)T Σ−1(x − µ)]

(3)

where t is a known target signature and x is a data sample. The background is assumed to be a Gaussian
distribution parametrized by µ and Σ which represent the mean and covariance, respectively.

The ACE statistic is a number between zero and one which can be interpreted as a measurement of the
presence of t in x. Geometrically, ACE can be estimated as the square of the cosine of the angle between x and
t, in a coordinate space transformed by the background estimation. This is illustrated in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3,
where the point cloud represents samples from the background model. A target vector is represented as t and a
In this example, ACE produces 0.84, indicating a relatively strong presence of
data sample is represented by x.

Figure 2. Original target signature t, data sample x, and randomly drawn background samples from a Gaussian,
parametrized by µ and Σ. The relative angle between the two vectors is also shown.

t in x. The key to eﬀective ACE performance is accurate background estimation. Two approaches for estimation
of background mean and covariance are described in the following two sub-sections.

2.1 Global ACE

Appropriate background estimation is very important for ACE’s performance as a detection statistic. ACE
assumes that background points can be modeled as a multivariate random Gaussian distribution, parametrized
by a mean and covariance. In the simplest case, an entire data set or representative subset is processed at once to
generate an estimate of the mean and covariance. This estimate is then used for the entire data set or subset that
ACE is computed on. This method is referred to as Global ACE. While this method is non-causal, it is relatively
quick to execute because the background model parameters are only computed once. Global ACE also produces
comparable results to more complicated background estimations, in our experiments. This makes it useful for
testing other aspects of our detection algorithm, such as clustering or pre-processing. Once the background
model is estimated, the ACE statistic is computed using each element in the dictionary. The maximum ACE
statistic across all the elements is stored as the points ﬁnal conﬁdence.

Figure 3. Transformed target, data, and background vectors. The mean is subtracted and the inverse covariance matrix
is multiplied to transform each vector. In this case, the angle between t and x is decreased resulting in a higher ACE
statistic.

2.2 Woodbury Identity Updated ACE

The second method is a causal background estimation approach and takes advantage of the fact that only the
inverse of the covariance matrix is actually used in ACE. This method, referred to as the Woodbury Identity
Updated Adaptive Coherence Estimator (WACE), uses the Woodbury Inverse Matrix Identity16 to update the
inverse covariance matrix directly. This identity has previously been used for background estimation in anomaly
detection using a ground penetrating radar system.17 The mean and covariance estimates are updated using
a lagging window running total style estimation. For the WEMI data sets used in our experiments, the ﬁrst
N samples can be assumed to contain mostly background points. These ﬁrst N samples are used to initialize
the background model parameters. This initial estimate is used to compute the ACE statistic for the ﬁrst 2N
samples. From then on, the k − N th ACE statistic is compared with a threshold, where k is the current sample
index. If the value is below the threshold, the point is considered part of the background and thus is added to
the estimates using Equations 4 and 5,

µk+1 = (1 − λ)µk + λ(xk−N − µk)

(cid:34)

Σ−1
k+1 =

1

1 − λ

k −
Σ−1

(xk−N − µk)(xk−N − µk)T
λ + (xk−N − µk)T (xk−N − µk)
1−λ

(cid:35)

(4)

(5)

where Σ−1 is the inverse covariance estimate, x is a data sample, k is the sample index and λ is a small scalar
between zero and one that controls how much value to place on new background samples. Increasing λ will make
the estimate more adaptive to new background points. For our experiments, λ was set to 0.005.

3.1 Data Set Description

3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Experiments were performed on wideband electromagnetic induction data collected at a test facility. The data
set provided consists of fourteen subsets, called lanes. Each subset contains data from a physical lane where
explosive hazards were buried. The cart holding the WEMI system is driven down each of these lanes while
collecting WEMI data. With each WEMI data sample, a UTM coordinate is recorded from the on-board GPS
system and stored in a header ﬁle. The data set consists of a wide variety of explosive hazards, as well as metal
and non-metal clutter. The targets were buried at various depths and can be classiﬁed by their metallic content
and purpose. Object purposes include anti-tank (AT) and anti-personnel (AP). The data sets metallic content
is summarized in Table 3.1.

Table 1. Object description for WEMI data. Abbreviations, MT: Metal Target, LMT: Low-Metal Target, NMT: Non-
Metal Target, CL: Clutter.

MT LMT NMT CL

Lane 1
Lane 2
Lane 3
Lane 4
Lane 5
Lane 6
Totals

4
4
4
6
7
6
31

7
10
7
6
5
6
41

0
0
0
3
5
2
10

6
4
8
0
0
3
11

3.2 Alarm Generation

To score the results of ACE and other detectors, alarms must be generated. Alarms are, at minimum, a
structure containing a UTM coordinate and a conﬁdence value. To generate alarms, an approach which we call
morphological clustering is used. This algorithm ﬁrst maps all of the ACE conﬁdence values and their respective
UTM coordinates to a grid using linear interpolation. The location and value of the maximum conﬁdence value
in the grid is used to generate an alarm. After the alarm is generated, all points within a 0.5m halo set to zero.
The process is repeated until every point in the map is zero. This method for generation ensures monotonically
decreasing conﬁdence values. It also must cover the entire lane, guaranteeing total detection with at least the
lowest operating threshold. One disadvantage of this method is that a singular noisy point which resulted in a
high ACE conﬁdence will have its own alarm assigned, and its surrounding area zeroed out, potentially removing
relatively high conﬁdence points over locations where a targets are actually buried.

3.3 Results

The receiver operator curve in Figure 5 shows the results of four implemented detectors applied to the WEMI
data described in Section 3.1. Each method was applied to the fourteen lanes of WEMI buried explosive data.
The Energy method simply uses the sum of the magnitude of the responses at each operating frequency for
conﬁdence values. All other detectors use the same one hundred DSRF elements as a target dictionary. The
alarm generation method used for all detectors is the described in Section 3.2. Conﬁdence maps are often plotted
to visualize results for qualitative comparison. An example WACE conﬁdence map for a single lane is shown in
Figure 4. The UTM coordinate for each alarm is compared to a list of ground truth points to generate a receiver

Figure 4. Woodbury Identity Updated Adaptive Coherence Estimator conﬁdence map. High conﬁdence points are colored
yellow, low conﬁdence points are colored blue. Red dots are plotted at ground truth centers. Note: Not all ground truth
points are targets (i.e., some ground truth points correspond to clutter objects in the lane).

operator curve (ROC). Alarms located within a small halo (0.25m) of targets are considered true positives.
Alarms over clutter, both metal and non-metal, were ignored in scoring. Targets at a depth below eight inches
were also ignored. All other alarms are considered false alarms. Two ROCs are shown. Figure 5 shows the
scoring results on all targets. Figure 6 shows the scoring results exuding all but anti-personnel (AP) targets.

3.4 Conclusion

All methods show a marked improvement over the Energy detector, which serves as a baseline. JOMP is naturally
more conservative, with its two tapped approach when it comes to assigning high conﬁdences. A high JOMP
conﬁdence requires matching target signatures in two nearby points instead of just one such as in ACE. While
this makes JOMP resilient to random ﬂuctuations which may resemble targets, there is nothing to adjust for
background distributions. ACE, however, transforms the data and target vectors according to the background
estimate before comparing them. This helps ACE to discriminate between targets and non-targets more easily.
WACE preforms similarly to ACE Global, with the beneﬁt of being causal and thus theoretically implementable

Figure 5. Receiver Operator Curves for each detector applied to the WEMI data set. Alarms over clutter are ignored.

Figure 6. Receiver Operator Curves for each detector applied to the WEMI data set, excluding all but anti-personnel
(AP) targets. Alarms over clutter are ignored.

in real-time. Both ACE based algorithms outperform JOMP and Energy at all false alarm rates. WACE also has
the advantage of eﬃciently updating the inverse covariance matrix, compared to laboriously re-estimating it with
each new background point. In addition, the lagging window in WACE is intended to prevent the background
estimate from learning current targets. The running total style estimation also makes WACE more adaptive to
local background distributions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was funded by Army Research Oﬃce grant number 66398-CS to support the US Army RDECOM
CERDEC NVESD. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as representing the oﬃcial policies either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Oﬃce,
Army Research Laboratory, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and
distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation hereon.

1. Scott, W., “Broadband array of electromagnetic induction sensors for detecting buried landmines,” IEEE

International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium 2, 375–378 (2008).

REFERENCES

2. Gao, P., Collins, L., Garber, P., Geng, N., and Carin, L., “Classifcation of landmine-like metal targets
using wideband electromagnetic induction,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 38,
1352–1361 (2000).

3. Dula, J., Zare, A., Ho, D., and Gader, P., “Landmine classifcation using possibilistic k-nearest neighbors

with wideband electromagnetic induction data,” SPIE Proceedings 8709, 87091 (2013).

4. Yuksel, S., Ramachandran, G., Gader, P., Wilson, J., Ho, D., and Heo, G., “Hierarchical methods for
landmine detection with wideband electromagnetic induction and ground penetrating radar multisensor
systems,” IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium 2, 177–180 (2008).

5. Ramachandran, G., Gader, P., and Wilson, J., “Granma gradient angle model algorithm on wideband emi

data for landmine detection,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 7, 535–539 (2010).

6. Gao, P., Collins, L., Geng, N., and Carin, L., “Classifcation of buried metal objects using wideband frequency
domain electromagnetic induction responses: a comparison of optimal and sub optimal processors,” IEEE
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium 3, 1819–1822 (1999).

7. Goldberg, S., Glenn, T., Wilson, J., and Gader, P., “Landmine detection using two-tapped joint orthogonal

matching pursuits,” SPIE Proceedings 8357, 83570B–83570B–8 (2012).

8. Wei, M.-H., Scott, W., and McClellan, J., “Landmine detection using the discrete spectrum of relaxation

frequencies,” IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium , 834–837 (2011).

9. Wei, M.-H., Scott, W., and J., M., “Robust estimation of the discrete spectrum of relaxations for elec-
tromagnetic induction responses,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 48, 1169–1179
(2010).

10. Pati, Y., Rezaiifar, R., and Krishnaprasad, P., “Orthogonal matching pursuit: recursive function approxi-
mation with applications to wavelet decomposition,” Signals Systems and Computers Conference Record of
The Twenty Seventh Asilomar Conference , 40–44 (1993).

11. Kraut, S., Scharf, L., and Butler, R., “The adaptive coherence estimator: a uniformly most powerful

invariant adaptive detection statistic,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 53, 427–438 (2005).

12. Yan, H., Zhang, Y., Wei, W., Zhang, L., Li, F., and Wang, B., “An mcd based local ace algorithm for
hyperspectral imagery target detection,” IEEE International Conference on Orange Technologies , 21–24
(2014).

13. Scharf, L. and McWhorter, L., “Adaptive matched subspace detectors and adaptive coherence estimators,”
Signals Systems and Computers Conference Record of the Thirtieth Asilomar Conference 2, 1114–1117
(1996).

14. McWhorter, L., Scharf, L., and Grifths, L., “Adaptive coherence estimation for radar signal processing,”
Signals Systems and Computers Conference Record of the Thirtieth Asilomar Conference 1, 536–540 (1996).
15. Manolakis, D., “Detection algorithms for hyperspectral imaging applications: a signal processing perspec-
tive,” IEEE Workshop on Advances in Techniques for Analysis of Remotely Sensed Data , 378–384 (2003).
16. Riedel, K., “A sherman morrison woodbury identity for rank augmenting matrices with application to

centering,” SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications 13, 659–662 (1992).

17. Ho, D., Harris, S., Zare, A., and Cook, M., “Anomaly detection of subsurface objects using handheld

ground-penetrating radar,” SPIE Proceedings 9454, 94541 (2015).

