1

A compressive sensing approach for enhancing

breast cancer detection using a hybrid DBT / NRI

conﬁguration

Richard Obermeier and Jose Angel Martinez-Lorenzo

Abstract—This work presents a novel breast cancer imaging
approach that uses compressive sensing in a hybrid Digital Breast
Tomosynthesis (DBT) / Nearﬁeld Radar Imaging (NRI) system
conﬁguration. The non-homogeneous tissue distribution of the
breast, described in terms of dielectric constant and conductivity,
is extracted from the DBT image, and it is used by a full-wave
Finite Difference in the Frequency Domain (FDFD) method to
build a linearized model of the non-linear NRI imaging problem.
The inversion of the linear problem is solved using compressive
sensing imaging techniques, which lead to a reduction on the
required number of sensing antennas and operational bandwidth
without loss of performance.

Keywords—breast cancer detection, microwave imaging, com-

pressive sensing, convex optimization.

II. METHODOLOGY

A. System Conﬁguration

The concept of a fused DBT / NRI imaging system was
ﬁrst introduced in [3], [5], and the conﬁguration of the 3D
imaging mechatronics device was presented in [4]. In this
approach, the breast is placed under clinical compression, and
the DBT measurements are recorded using low-dosage X-rays.
The DBT measurements are used to create a 3D reconstruction
of the fat distribution in the breast. Simultaneously, a set of
NRI measurements are collected using a series of microwave
antennas, which are placed along the breast in a bolus material
in order to maximize its coupling with the breast surface.

I.

INTRODUCTION

B. The Sensing Problem

It has been shown [1] that X-ray based Digital Breast
Tomosynthesis (DBT) enhances the imaging capabilities of
Conventional Mammography (CM) by producing volumetric
imaging. Unfortunately, DBT still suffers from the limited
radiological contrast existing between cancerous and healthy
ﬁbroglandular tissue, which is of the order of 1%. At mi-
crowave frequencies,
the contrast between cancerous and
healthy ﬁbroglandular tissue is of the order of 10% [2]. For
this reason, Nearﬁeld Radar Imaging (NRI), working at these
frequencies, is an appealing technology to detect cancerous
tissue within the breast. Unfortunately, NRI by itself fails to
detect cancerous tissue embedded in a random, heterogeneous
matrix of ﬁbroglandular and fatty breast tissue.

A recent paper [3] demonstrated that it is possible to fuse
DBT with NRI to achieve improved breast cancer detection.
The successful detection of breast cancer using this conﬁgura-
tion required a high performance NRI sensor operating with the
following requirements: 1) 17 transmitting/receiving antennas
in a multi-static conﬁguration, and 2) a wideband system,
having a 1GHz bandwidth at a 1.5GHz center frequency.
These high performance requirements make the NRI sensor
too expensive for widespread use in a clinical setting.

This paper presents preliminary 2D results of a new 3D
imaging approach for the NRI sensor [4], based on techniques
from compressive sensing theory. This approach utilizes a
multiple monostatic conﬁguration with fewer antennas and a
smaller operating bandwidth than the NRI system presented
in [3]. The new approach reduces the cost of the NRI system
without loss of performance, thereby making the technology
more suitable for clinical use.

The NRI system operates using a multiple monostatic con-
ﬁguration, in which each antenna utilizes stepped-frequency
waveforms. Measurements of nf frequencies are taken by
na antennas for a total of M = na · nf measurements.
The relationship between the electric ﬁelds E(r, ω) and the
unknown complex permittivity (r, ω) of the breast tissues can
be expressed as:

(cid:90)

Es(r, ω) =

Gb(r, r(cid:48), ω)k2

b (r(cid:48), ω)E(r(cid:48), ω)χ(r(cid:48), ω)dr(cid:48)

(1)

E(r, ω) = Eb(r, ω) + Es(r, ω)

(2)
where Gb(r, r(cid:48), ω) are the Green’s functions of the background
medium, Eb(r, ω) are the incident electric ﬁelds, Es(r, ω) are
the scattered electric ﬁelds, and χ(r, ω) = (r,ω)−b(r,ω)
are
the contrast variables [6]–[8].

b(r,ω)

Eq. 1 is a nonlinear function of the contrast variable χ(r, ω)
and total electric ﬁeld E(r, ω), and so nonlinear programming
techniques such as the Contrast Source Inversion (CSI) al-
gorithm [6]–[8] must be applied in order to recover χ(r, ω).
These types of nonlinear algorithms typically require several
calls to a forward model solver in each iteration, which makes
them computationally expensive. As a result, it is desirable
to make some simplifying assumptions in order to reduce the
computation time. This work makes two such assumptions.
First, the Born approximation is applied, E(r, ω) ≈ Eb(r, ω),
in order to linearize Eq. 1. Second, the complex permittivities
are assumed to be approximately constant over the frequency
range of the NRI system, i.e. (r, ω) ≈ (r) and b(r, ω) ≈
the contrast variable is also approximately
b(r), so that

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
1

 
 
]

.

C
O
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
1
5
1
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

constant over frequency. With these two modiﬁcations, Eq. 1
can be rewritten in the following form:

(cid:90)

Es(r, ω) =

Gb(r, r(cid:48), ω)k2

b (r(cid:48), ω)Eb(r(cid:48), ω)χ(r(cid:48))dr(cid:48)

(3)

+ ˆes(r, ω)

where ˆes(r, ω) is the error introduced by the approximating
assumptions.
Eq. 3 can be discretized as y = Ax + e + η, where
x ∈ CN are the contrast variables, y ∈ CM are the measured
ﬁelds, A ∈ CM×N is the sensing matrix constructed from
the incident ﬁelds and Green’s functions of the background
medium, e ∈ CM is the error vector, and η ∈ CM is
the random noise introduced by the measurement system. In
practice, M < N, and so this system has an inﬁnite number of
solutions satisfying y = Ax+e+η. When (cid:107)e(cid:107)(cid:96)2 (cid:28) (cid:107)η(cid:107)(cid:96)2, the
performance of linear inverse techniques only depends upon
the vector η. When (cid:107)e(cid:107)(cid:96)2 ∼ (cid:107)η(cid:107)(cid:96)2, then the performance
of linear inverse techniques depends upon both e and η. In
practice, the statistics of the measurement noise η can be
estimated in order to tune the proposed inverse algorithm
accordingly. However, it is difﬁcult to estimate e, since it
requires a-priori knowledge of the unknown contrast variable
x.

Stand-alone NRI systems tend to perform poorly in breast
cancer imaging applications because they lack a suitable
background model b(r, ω). Without any prior knowledge, NRI
systems select a homogeneous background medium that has a
dielectric constant derived from averaging that of low-water-
content (LWC) fatty tissue and high-water-content (HWC)
ﬁbroglandular tissue. Choosing a homogeneous dielectric con-
stant leads to a contrast variable x that has a signiﬁcant number
of large, non-zero elements. This violates the assumptions
made by the Born approximation and produces an error vector
e with a large norm, which ultimately challenges the accurate
inversion of the linear system of equations.

The hybrid DBT / NRI system utilizes the prior knowl-
edge obtained from the DBT image in order to construct
the heterogeneous background model, thereby overcoming the
aforementioned limitations of the homogeneous model used
by stand-alone NRI systems. In this hybrid system, the DBT
image is segmented into three types of tissue, skin, muscle
(pectoralis major), and breast tissue, and it is assumed that the
latter only contains healthy tissue. Additionally, each pixel of
breast tissue consists of p% of fatty tissue and (100 − p)%
of ﬁbroglandular tissue, and its constitutive properties r(r, ω)
and σ(r, ω) are determined from a composite model, which
considers the dispersive properties of the breast tissues [9].
Fig. 1 displays the fat content segmented from a single
slice of a 3D DBT image. The segmented geometry is input
to an electromagnetic numerical simulation based on Finite
Differences in the Frequency Domain (FDFD) [10] in order
to model the NRI sensing process. The FDFD is a full-wave
model that accounts for all mutual interactions within the
breast, and is used to generate the incident ﬁelds Eb(r, ω) and
the non-uniform, cancer free Green’s functions Gb(r, r(cid:48), ω).

2

Fig. 1. Fat content of breast segmented from a 3D DBT image. High intensity
indicates a high percentage of fat.

III.

IMAGING WITH COMPRESSIVE SENSING

Ideally, the hybrid DBT / NRI system would segment the
healthy breast tissue perfectly and would classify any cancer-
ous tissue as HWC ﬁbroglandular tissue, producing a contrast
variable x that is non-zero only at the locations of cancerous
lesions. In this case, the reconstruction process becomes a
sparse recovery problem, which can be solved using techniques
from compressive sensing (CS) theory. CS theory is a relatively
novel signal processing technique, which was ﬁrst introduced
by Candes et al. in [11], and it has since been reﬁned in
many other works [12]–[15]. CS establishes that sparse signals
can be recovered using far fewer measurements than required
by the Nyquist sampling criterion. In order to apply such
principles, certain mathematical conditions must be satisﬁed
by the sensing matrix A and the reconstructed image x. The
sensing matrix must satisfy the Restricted Isometry Property
condition, which is related to the independence of its columns,
and the number of non-zero entries, Nnz, of the reconstructed
image must be much smaller than the total number of elements,
N. If the two aforementioned conditions are satisﬁed, then
the reconstruction of the unknown vector can be performed
with a small number of measurements by solving a norm-1
optimization problem. In this work, the contrast variables x
are recovered by solving the modiﬁed basis pursuit denoising
problem:

x

(cid:107)Ax − y(cid:107)2

+ λ(cid:107)x(cid:107)(cid:96)1
1
minimize
2
subject to Re(diag(b)x + b) ≥ 1
Im(diag(b)x + b) ≥ 0

(cid:96)2

(4)

where the constraints on the variable x ensure that the solution
is physically realizable, i.e. r ≥ 1 and σ ≥ 0. In practice, the
weighting factor λ must be selected based upon the expected
error in the measurement vector y and sparsity of the vector
x. This problem can be efﬁciently solved using Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient method for non-smooth convex functions
[16], which was ﬁrst applied to the basis pursuit denoising

problem in [14]. In this method, the norm-1 term is replaced
by the smooth approximation:

N(cid:88)

n=1

gµ(x) = gµ(x1, . . . , xN ) =

fµ(xn)

where the Huber function fµ(·) is deﬁned as:
|x| ≥ µ
|x| < µ

fµ(x) =

1

2µ|x|2

(cid:40)|x|

(cid:96)2

The Huber function is Lipschitz continuously differentiable,
so ﬁrst-order techniques such as Nesterov’s method can be
2(cid:107)Ax −
used to minimize the smoothed objective function 1
y(cid:107)2
+ λgµ(x). At each step in Nesterov’s method, the desired
variable is updated using a step direction derived from the gra-
dients up to and including the current iteration. This updated
point is then projected onto the feasible set to ensure that all
of the constraints are satisﬁed. For the imaging problem of Eq.
4, the projection operator can be expressed as the solution to
the following convex optimization problem:

(cid:107)x − z(cid:107)2

x

minimize
subject to Re(diag(b)x + b) ≥ 1
Im(diag(b)x + b) ≥ 0

(cid:96)2

(7)

This problem is separable in the elements x1, . . . , xN of the
vector x. For a scalar contrast x, it can be shown that this
projection problem has the following closed form solution:

PQp (x) =

P(bx + b) − b

b

P() = max(Re(), 1) +  max(Im(), 0)

(9)
The reader is referred to the literature [14], [16] for further
details on Nesterov’s method

3

Fig. 2. Real and imaginary parts of true contrast variable χ obtained when
the DBT image is segmented perfectly.

and the green curves represent the breast and lesion borders.
Since the fat percentage was segmented perfectly, the contrast
variable is non-zero only at the location of the cancerous le-
sion. Figure 3 displays the estimated contrast variable obtained
using the perfect fat percentage segmentation and noiseless
measurements. The artifacts within the image are due to the
error vector ˆes(r, ω) that is introduced to the measurement
vector when the simplifying assumptions of Section II-B are
applied. Despite these artifacts, the algorithm is able to locate
the cancerous lesion. This represents a signiﬁcant improvement
over the phase-based results presented in [3], which utilized
17 antennas in a multi-static conﬁguration and 11 frequencies
over a 1GHz bandwidth in order image the cancerous lesion.

(5)

(6)

(8)

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

Following the process of Section II-B, a 2D model of a
healthy breast was generated by segmenting a 2D slice from
a 3D DBT image. In order to simulate data from a cancerous
case, a lesion with frequency-dependent electrical properties
modeled after [2] was added to the healthy breast. A 2D
version of the FDFD code was used to generate the synthetic
NRI measurements of the healthy breast, the synthetic NRI
measurements of the cancerous breast, and the sensing matrix
of the healthy breast A according to Eq. 3. Note that the
FDFD model accounted for the dispersive properties of both
the healthy breast tissue and the cancerous tissue; only the in-
version process utilized the simplifying assumptions of Section
II-B. In the simulation, the NRI system used six transmitting
and receiving antennas operating in a multiiple monostatic
conﬁguration. Each antenna was excited with three different
frequencies, 500MHz, 600MHz, and 700MHz, for a total of
18 measurements among the antennas.

Figure 2 displays the true contrast variable obtained when
the fat percentage is perfectly segmented from the DBT image.
In this plot, the white dots represent the antenna positions

Fig. 3.
Real and imaginary parts of reconstructed contrast variable ˆχ
obtained when the DBT image is segmented perfectly and there is no
measurement noise.

Figure 4 displays the true contrast variable obtained when
the fat percentage is segmented from the DBT image with
10% random error. More speciﬁcally, the fat percentage values
were corrupted by i.i.d. random noise following a uniform
distribution, taking values between ±10% with equal prob-
ability. Since the fat percentage is not segmented correctly,
the true contrast variable is non-zero within the healthy tis-

sue. Nevertheless, the true contrast variable is approximately
compressible, and so Eq. 4 can still be used to image the
breast. This result can be seen in Figure 5, which displays
the estimated contrast variable obtained using the noisy fat
percentage segmentation and noiseless measurements.

Figure 6 displays the estimated contrast variable obtained
using the noisy fat percentage segmentation and measurements
whose SNR = 49dB. It is important to note that the signals
in this SNR calculation are the electric ﬁelds scattered by the
entire breast, and not just the ﬁelds scattered by the cancerous
lesion. In this example,
the ﬁelds scattered by the lesion
are approximately 40dB lower in magnitude than the ﬁelds
scattered by the rest of the breast, so that the “lesion signal to
noise ratio” is on the order of 10dB. Therefore, the NRI system
must have a signiﬁcant SNR to ensure that the ﬁelds produced
by cancerous lesions are not overwhelmed by the noise, or it
must have antennas with higher directivity in order to improve
the SNR - the latter case may require the CS algorithm to
use additional measurements. With this high SNR, the CS
algorithm is able to image the cancerous lesion with some

additional artifacts compared to the noiseless case. However,
when the SNR is decreased to 43dB, the algorithm is no longer
able to image the lesion, as can be seen in Figure 7.

4

Fig. 6.
Real and imaginary parts of reconstructed contrast variable ˆχ
obtained when the fat percentage is segmented from the DBT image with
10% error and and the measurement SNR = 49dB.

Fig. 4. Real and imaginary parts of true contrast variable χ obtained when
the fat percentage is segmented from the DBT image with 10% error.

Fig. 5.
Real and imaginary parts of reconstructed contrast variable ˆχ
obtained when the fat percentage is segmented from the DBT image with
10% error and there is no measurement noise.

Fig. 7.
Real and imaginary parts of reconstructed contrast variable ˆχ
obtained when the fat percentage is segmented from the DBT image with
10% error and and the measurement SNR = 43dB.

V. CONCLUSIONS

This work presents a novel approach for imaging breast
cancer using compressive sensing techniques in a hybrid DBT
/ NRI imaging system. Using the prior knowledge obtained
from the DBT reconstruction, the hybrid system creates a
background tissue distribution of the assumed healthy breast,
thereby overcoming a common pitfall
in stand-alone NRI
imaging systems. Since cancerous lesions tend to be localized
to a relatively small region of the breast, image reconstruction
can be expressed as a sparse recovery problem, which is solved
using techniques from compressive sensing. Numerical results
show that the CS imaging algorithm can localize cancerous
lesions within in the breast, even when corrupted by DBT
segmentation and measurement errors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work has been funded by the U.S. National Science

Foundation award number 1347454.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Kopans, S. Gavenonis, E. Halpern, and R. Moore, “Calciﬁcations in
the breast and digital breast tomosynthesis,” The breast journal, vol. 17,
no. 6, pp. 638–644, 2011.

5

[3]

[2] M. Lazebnik, D. Popovic, L. McCartney, C. B. Watkins, M. J. Lind-
strom, J. Harter, S. Sewall, T. Ogilvie, A. Magliocco, T. M. Breslin
et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave dielectric
properties of normal, benign and malignant breast tissues obtained from
cancer surgeries,” Physics in Medicine and Biology, vol. 52, no. 20, p.
6093, 2007.
J. Martinez Lorenzo, R. Obermeier, F. Quivira, C. Rappaport, R. Moore,
and D. Kopans, “Fusing digital-breast-tomosynthesis and nearﬁeld-
radar-imaging information for a breast cancer detection algorithm,”
in Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium (AP-
SURSI), 2013 IEEE, July 2013, pp. 2038–2039.
J. H. J. J. A. M.-L. A. Molaei, A. Ghanbarzadeh Dagheyan, “Minia-
turized uwb antipodal vivaldi antenna for a mechatronic breast cancer
imaging system,” in IEEE AP-S International Symposium, 2015.

[4]

[5] R. Obermeier, M. Tivnan, C. Rappaport, and J. A. Martinez-Lorenzo,
“3d microwave nearﬁeld radar imaging (nri) using digital breast to-
mosynthesis (dbt) for non-invasive breast cancer detection,” in URSI
2014 — USNC-URSI Radio Science Meeting, July 2014.

[6] P. Van Den Berg and A. Abubakar, “Contrast source inversion method:
state of art,” Journal of Electromagnetic Waves and Applications,
vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 1503–1505, 2001.

[7] A. Abubakar, G. Pan, M. Li, L. Zhang, T. Habashy, and P. van den Berg,
“Three-dimensional seismic full-waveform inversion using the ﬁnite-
difference contrast source inversion method,” Geophysical Prospecting,
vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 874–888, 2011.

[9]

[8] A. Zakaria, I. Jeffrey, and J. LoVetri, “Full-vectorial parallel ﬁnite-
element contrast source inversion method,” Progress In Electromag-
netics Research, vol. 142, pp. 463–483, 2013.
J. Martinez Lorenzo, A. Basukoski, F. Quivira, C. Rappaport, R. Moore,
and D. Kopans, “Composite models for microwave dielectric constant
characterization of breast tissues,” in Antennas and Propagation Society
International Symposium (APSURSI), 2013 IEEE, July 2013, pp. 2036–
2037.

[10] C. Rappaport, A. Morgenthaler, and M. Kilmer, “FDFD modeling of
plane wave interactions with buried objects under rough surfaces,,” in
2001 IEEE Antenna and Propagation Society International Symposium,
2001, p. 318.

[11] E. J. Candes, J. K. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Stable signal recovery from
incomplete and inaccurate measurements,” Communications on pure
and applied mathematics, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 1207–1223, 2006.

[12] E. J. Cand`es, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Robust uncertainty principles:
Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency informa-
tion,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52, no. 2, pp.
489–509, 2006.

[13] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” Information Theory, IEEE Trans-

actions on, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, 2006.

[14] S. Becker, J. Bobin, and E. J. Cand`es, “Nesta: a fast and accurate ﬁrst-
order method for sparse recovery,” SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–39, 2011.

[15] A. Massa, P. Rocca, and G. Oliveri, “Compressive sensing in
electromagnetics-a review,” Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
IEEE, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 224–238, 2015.

[16] Y. Nesterov, “Smooth minimization of non-smooth functions,” Mathe-

matical programming, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 127–152, 2005.

