THE PARITY SEARCH PROBLEM

CHRISTIAN REIHER

Abstract. We prove that for any positive integers n and d there exists a collection
consisting of f “ d log n` Op1q subsets A1, A2, . . . , Af of rns such that for any two distinct
subsets X and Y of rns whose size is at most d there is an index i P rfs for which |Ai X X|
and |Ai X Y | have diﬀerent parity. Here we think of d as ﬁxed whereas n is thought of as
tending to inﬁnity, and the base of the logarithm is 2.

Translated into the language of combinatorial search theory, this tells us that

d log n ` Op1q

queries suﬃce to identify up to d marked items from a totality of n items if the answers
one gets are just whether an even or an odd number of marked elements has been queried,
even if the search is performed non-adaptively. Since the entropy method easily yields a
matching lower bound for the adaptive version of this problem, our result is asymptotically
best possible.

This answers a question posed by Dániel Gerbner and Balázs Patkós in Gyula

O.H. Katona’s Search Theory Seminar at the Rényi institute.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]

.

O
C
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
4
6
1
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

§1. Introduction

In a typical problem from combinatorial search theory a ﬁnite number of entities is given
to you some of which are considered to be marked or defective and your task is to ﬁnd out
which of them these are. For example, many recreational problems involving coins a few of
which are forged as well as a scale that may be used to expose them belong to this area.
For a thorough introduction to combinatorial search theory, the reader is referred to the

excellent and comprehensive survey article [3].

Recently Gerbner and Patkós [4] started to consider the following search problem:
One gets confronted with n items – the set of which may for convenience be identiﬁed with
the set rns “ t1, 2, . . . , nu – and one knows in advance that at most d of these items are
marked, where 0 ď d ď n. To identify them, one may make a sequence of queries, i.e.,
specify a sequence of subsets of rns, and each time one makes such a query one is told the
parity of the number of marked elements in ones query set. So, for instance, by querying
a set containing only one element one learns whether this element is marked or not and

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 05D05, 11T99, 90B40.
Key words and phrases. Combinatorial search theory, parity search, ﬁnite ﬁelds.

1

CHRISTIAN REIHER

2
hence the problem is solvable in principle. As usual, however, it is more interesting to
think about the least number of queries one needs to perform this task. More precisely,
Gerbner and Patkós asked what the asymptotic behaviour of this minimal number is if
d is ﬁxed whilst n tends to inﬁnity.

Now actually there are two version of this question. In the ﬁrst of these, called the
adaptive problem, one allows ones query sets to depend on the answers one has gotten to
all previous queries. In the second, non-adaptive version, one has to specify all query sets
before getting the ﬁrst answer. The main result of this article asserts that for both of these
versions d log n ` Op1q queries are necessary and suﬃcient.

It is quite standard to obtain a lower bound of the form d log n ` Op1q to the adaptive

problem, where the base of the logarithm is 2. For if

2m ă dÿ

i“0

ˆ

˙

n
i

“ Θpndq ,

then it may happen that each of the ﬁrst m answers reduces the number of outcomes still
possible by no more than a factor of two, for which reason m queries cannot be enough. It
is also clear that the non-adaptive problem requires no less queries than the adaptive one
for one may pretend to search adaptively while in fact not caring about the answers. Thus
it suﬃces to prove an upper bound of the form d log n ` Op1q to the non-adaptive problem.
It seems worth while to observe that the non-adaptive problem may also be viewed as
a question from extremal set theory. Speciﬁcally, one is interested in the number fpn, dq
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1.1. Given two positive integers n and d, let fpn, dq be the least integer f
such that there exist f subsets A1, A2, . . . , Af of rns with the following property: For any
two distinct subsets X and Y of rns the size of which is at most d, there exists an index
i P rfs such that the cardinalities of Ai X X and Ai X Y have diﬀerent parity.

I would like to record here that Gerbner and Patkós showed that choosing these
sets Ai uniformly at random one can get fpn, dq ď 2d log n`Op1q. Their proof uses the ﬁrst
moment method. It may be observed that a routine application of the symmetric version
of Lovász’s Local Lemma (see [2] or Corollary 5.1.2 from [1]) would allow us to improve
this to fpn, dq ď p2d ´ 1q log n ` Op1q. But in fact we shall prove fpn, dq “ d log n ` Op1q
below. Somewhat more explicitly, we shall get
Theorem 1.2. If d, m, and n denote three positive integers with dm ď n ă 2m, then
fpn, dq ď dm.

The proof will be given in the next section.

PARITY SEARCH

§2. The proof of Theorem 1.2

3

The actual proof of Theorem 1.2 is prepared by a sequence of three lemmata most of
which are of an algebraic nature. Throughout we denote the ﬁnite ﬁeld with q elements
by Fq and refer to the multiplicative group of its nonzero elements by Fˆ
q . If F is a ﬁeld
we write F n for the n-dimensional vector space over F. Finally we would like to remind
the reader that the number of ones appearing in a vector from Fn2 is sometimes called its
weight.

The basic strategy of our proof is as follows: one interprets the problem as a statement
about vector spaces over F2 and applies a change of basis to see that all one needs to
do is proving Lemma 2.3. Using a direct sum decomposition this task can be reduced to
showing Lemma 2.2, which in turn is accomplished by means of an explicit construction
based on the following algebraic fact exploiting the multiplicative structure of ﬁelds having
characteristic 2.
Lemma 2.1. If A Ę t0u denotes a ﬁnite subset of a ﬁeld of characteristic 2, then for some
odd positive integer k ď |A| one has
xk ‰ 0.
Proof. Pick any a P A ´ t0u and observe that
px ´ bq “ a

pa ´ bq ‰ 0 .

ź

ź

ÿ

ř

xPA

x

xPA

bPA´tau

bPA´tau

Expanding the product appearing under the sum of the left hand side and rearranging we
get

with certain irrelevant coeﬃcients α1, . . . , α|A| from our base ﬁeld. Thus there exists some
positive integer k1 ď |A| such that
xk1 ‰ 0. Now if k denotes the least such k1, then k
automatically has to be odd, for otherwise we could use the equation

αi

xi ‰ 0

i“1

|A|ÿ
ř
ÿ

xPA

xPA

ÿ

xPA

´ÿ

xPA

xk “

xk{2

¯2

to obtain a contradiction. Thereby our lemma is proved.

(cid:3)

Lemma 2.2. For any two positive integers d and m, the F2-vector space Fdm2
has a
generating subset B of size at least 2m ´ 1 such that each vector admits at most one
representation as the sum of at most d distinct members of B.
Proof. Plainly it suﬃces to exhibit a set consisting of 2m ´ 1 vectors from Fdm2 possessing
the unique representability property. For once we have found such a set B, we may look at

4
a direct sum decomposition Fdm2 “ xBy ‘ U with some vector space U and extend B by a
basis of U to achieve both goals.

CHRISTIAN REIHER

For the purpose of ﬁnding such a set B, we may evidently replace the vector space Fdm2
appearing in this statement by Fd2m. Corresponding to each number ξ P F2m we deﬁne vξ
to be the vector pξ, ξ3, . . . , ξ2d´1q from the latter space, and then we claim that

B “ tvξ | ξ P Fˆ
2mu

ř

ξPA

ř

ξPA

vξ “ 0. So in particular for all odd k ď |A| we have

is as desired. To see this, suppose that some vector x admitted two distinct representations
as the sum of at most d elements from B. Adding these representations up and canceling
terms appearing twice, we obtain a nonempty subset A of Fˆ
2m whose size is at most 2d
ξk “ 0, contrary to
such that
(cid:3)
our previous lemma.
Lemma 2.3. Let d, m, and n denote three positive integers such that dm ď n ă 2m. Then
there is some vector subspace of Fn2 of codimension dm containing no nonzero vector whose
weight is at most 2d.
Proof. It is convenient to think of Fn2 as being the space V “ Fdm2 ‘ Fn´dm
It has
W “ t0u‘ Fn´dm
as a subspace of codimension dm. By our foregoing lemma there exist n
distinct vectors b1, b2, . . . , bn from Fdm2
such that each vector from this space is expressible
in at most one way as the sum of at most d distinct vectors from this sequence, and such
that b1, b2, . . . , bdm is a basis of this space. Now deﬁne v1, v2, . . . , vdm to be the zero vector
of Fn´dm

and let vdm`1, vdm`2, . . . , vn be any basis of this space. Clearly the set

.

2

2

2

L “ tpbi, viq| i “ 1, 2, . . . , nu

forms a basis of V and by our construction it is not possible that a nonempty sum comprised
of at most 2d distinct terms from L gives a vector from W. Any automorphism of V
sending L to the standard basis maps W onto a vector subspace W 1 whose codimension is
still dm and that does not contain any nonzero vector whose weight is at most 2d. So W 1
(cid:3)
is as desired.
We are now ready to prove Theorem 1.2. To do so we identify the power set of rns with
the vector space Fn2 via characteristic functions. It is well known that the parity of the
size of the intersection of two sets thus corresponds to the standard scalar product. Our
task now consists in exhibiting dm vectors v1, v2, . . . , vdm such that for any two distinct
vectors x and y the weight of which is at most d there is some i P rdms with x ¨ vi ‰ y ¨ vi.
This may be achieved by taking W to be a vector subspace of Fn2 as obtained in our
third lemma and then choosing the vectors v1, v2, . . . , vdm so as to span its orthogonal

PARITY SEARCH

5
complement. Given any two distinct vectors x and y from Fn2 whose weights are at most d,
one easily sees that their diﬀerence is nonzero and has weight at most 2d. Therefore it
cannot belong to W, which in turn means that there is indeed some i P rdms satisfying
px ´ yq ¨ vi ‰ 0. This completes the proof of our main result, Theorem 1.2.
Acknowledgement. I would heartily like to thank Gyula O.H. Katona for inviting
me to the Alfred Rényi Institute for one week, where this piece of research was carried out,
and Dániel Gerbner and Balázs Patkós for telling me about the problem solved here.

References

[1] N. Alon and J. H. Spencer, The probabilistic method, 3rd ed., Wiley-Interscience Series in Discrete
Mathematics and Optimization, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, 2008. With an appendix on
the life and work of Paul Erdős. MR2437651 Ò1

[2] P. Erdős and L. Lovász, Problems and results on 3-chromatic hypergraphs and some related questions,
Inﬁnite and ﬁnite sets (Colloq., Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erdős on his 60th birthday), Vol. II,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975, pp. 609–627. Colloq. Math. Soc. János Bolyai, Vol. 10. MR0382050
Ò1

[3] G. O. H. Katona, Combinatorial search problems, Survey of combinatorial theory (Proc. Internat.
Sympos., Colorado State Univ., Fort Collins, Colo., 1970), North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1973, pp. 285–
308. MR0368735 Ò1

[4] B. Patkós, Talk given in Katona’s research seminar on combinatorial search theory at the Rényi institute

in February 2012. Ò1

Fachbereich Mathematik, Universität Hamburg, D-20146 Hamburg, Germany
E-mail address: Christian.Reiher@uni-hamburg.de

