6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]

.

A
O
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
4
7
1
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective
survey

Mark Tomforde

Abstract This survey reports on current progress of programs to classify graph C∗-
algebras and Leavitt path algebras up to Morita equivalence using K-theory. Begin-
ning with an overview and some history, we trace the development of the classiﬁ-
cation of simple and nonsimple graph C∗-algebras and state theorems summarizing
the current status of these efforts. We then discuss the much more nascent efforts
to classify Leavitt path algebras, and we describe the current status of these efforts
as well as outline current impediments that must be solved for this classiﬁcation
program to progress. In particular, we give two speciﬁc open problems that must
be addressed in order to identify the correct K-theoretic invariant for classiﬁcation
of simple Leavitt path algebras, and we discuss the signiﬁcance of various possible
outcomes to these open problems.

1 Introduction

In 1976 Elliott proved a result, now known as Elliott’s theorem, which states that di-
rect limits of semisimple ﬁnite-dimensional algebras may be classiﬁed up to isomor-
phism by the dimension group (later identiﬁed with the scaled, ordered K0-group)
of the algebra. Elliott’s theorem implies that for the class of AF-algebras (i.e., C∗-
algebraic direct limits of ﬁnite-dimensional C∗-algebras) the scaled, ordered topo-
logical K0-group is a complete isomorphism invariant, and it also implies that in
the class of ultramatricial algebras (i.e., algebraic direct limits of direct sums of
semisimple ﬁnite-dimensional algebras over a ﬁxed ﬁeld) the scaled, ordered al-
gebraic K0-group is a complete isomorphism invariant. (In this case the algebraic
K0-group and topological K0-group coincide.) Based on this result, Elliott boldly
proposed that many additional classes of (C∗-)algebras can be classiﬁed up to iso-

Mark Tomforde, Department of Mathematics, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA
e-mail: tomforde@math.uh.edu
The ﬁnal publication is available at link.springer.com. DOI forthcoming.

1

2

Mark Tomforde

morphism by K-theoretic invariants, and he famously formulated what is now called
Elliott’s conjecture: “All separable nuclear simple C∗-algebras are classiﬁed up to
isomorphism by K-theoretic invariants.” Work on this conjecture has been referred
to as the Elliott program, and over the past four decades there have been numerous
contributions made by several mathematicians, not the least of which are due to El-
liott himself. Very recently, work of Tikuisis, White, and Winter has completed the
ﬁnal steps for classifying all unital, separable, simple, and nuclear C∗-algebras of
ﬁnite nuclear dimension which satisfy the UCT [21].

The established work on the Elliott program is vast — indeed, papers on the sub-
ject total thousands of pages and even a survey of all the accomplishments over
the past four decades would most likely require a document the size of a book
if it wished to be comprehensive. (See the book [16] for an introductory survey
of the Elliott program with an emphasis on providing a technical overview of the
Kirchberg-Phillips classiﬁcation theorem, and see the papers [9, 17] for a summary
of the accomplishments in the Elliott program over the past 15 years.)

In the discussions here we wish to focus on two natural extensions of the Elliott

program:

Extension 1: Go beyond the simple C∗-algebras and attempt to classify certain

nonsimple nuclear C∗-algebras using K-theory.

Extension 2:

Step outside of the class of C∗-algebras and attempt to classify cer-

tain simple algebras using (algebraic) K-theory.

Of course there is little to no hope these two extensions can be accomplished for
all nuclear C∗-algebras or all simple algebras, so one major component of each pro-
gram is to identify classes of nonsimple C∗-algebras and simple algebras that are
amenable to classiﬁcation. Another major component of each program is determin-
ing exactly what K-theoretic data is needed for the classifying invariant.

Signiﬁcant progress for Extension 1 has been made for the class of graph C∗-
algebras, while progress for Extension 2 has been more difﬁcult, but had some stun-
ning successes for the class of Leavitt path algebras. These two classes, which we
collectively refer to as graph algebras, will be the focus of this survey.

Readers who have no prior experience with graph algebras may initially (and
incorrectly!) believe these classes are fairly small and specialized. However, keep in
mind that every AF-algebra is Morita equivalent to a graph C∗-algebra [5] and every
ultramatricial algebra over C is Morita equivalent to a Leavitt path algebra. Thus the
graph C∗-algebras and Leavitt path algebras are generalizations of the AF-algebras
and ultramatrical algebras to which Elliott’s theorem from 1976 applies. As such,
they are very suitable classes to explore at the beginnings of these programs.

Moreover, every Kirchberg algebra with free K1-group is Morita equivalent to a
graph C∗-algebra [20], so the class of graph C∗-algebras also generalizes many of the
simple C∗-algebras to which the Kirchberg-Phillips classiﬁcation theorem applies
[14]. Consequently, the graph C∗-algebras comprise a large class containing several
nonsimple C∗-algebras as well as many simple C∗-algebras of both AF and purely
inﬁnite type. At the same time, the graph C∗algebras are not too large to escape

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

3

classiﬁcation. The proposed invariant, called the ﬁltered (or sometimes “ﬁltrated”)
K-theory, is a natural generalization of the invariant used for simple C∗-algebras,
and contains the collection of all ordered K0-groups and K1-groups of subquotients
of the C∗-algebra taking into account all the natural transformations among them.
While this seems like the obvious choice for the invariant, Meyer and Nest have
constructed two separable, purely inﬁnite C∗-algebras in the bootstrap class (each
with a primitive ideal space having four points) that have the same ﬁltered K-theory
but are not Morita equivalent, thus demonstrating that ﬁltered K-theory is inadequate
to classify general nonsimple nuclear C∗-algebras. This example also means that
restricting to the class of graph algebras is not an artiﬁcial choice, but done out of
necessity to obtain working theorems. The counterexamples of Meyer and Nest lie
outside the class of graph C∗-algebras, and the current working conjecture is that
ﬁltered K-theory sufﬁces to classify graph C∗-algebras.

While a promising candidate for the classifying invariant of graph C∗-algebras
has been identiﬁed, and many initial cases have been established successfully (see
[6] for a taxonomy), classiﬁcation results for Leavitt path algebras have been more
piecemeal, and the correct invariant for classiﬁcation is still uncertain. In this sur-
vey, we give a summary of the current status of classiﬁcation results for simple
and nonsimple graph C∗-algebras, and we describe how these results have guided
initial work on classifying the simple Leavitt path algebras. We also outline the ex-
isting classiﬁcation results for simple Leavitt path algebras, and describe the current
search for a complete Morita equivalence invariant in terms of K-theory. We state
two important open questions currently facing the classiﬁcation program for simple
Leavitt path algebras, and we also discuss the implications of various answers to
these two open questions.

The “selective survey” of the title refers to the fact that our attention will be
primarily be concentrated on the “geometric” classiﬁcations described in terms of
moves on the graphs. We will discuss the role that dynamical systems have played in
these geometric classiﬁcations, and outline how dynamics results have been applied
to graph algebras. We will omit proofs in favor of focusing on the big picture, but do
our best to explain the key ideas used to obtain results. In addition, to avoid getting
bogged down in too many technicalities, throughout this survey we shall restrict
our attention to classiﬁcation up to Morita equivalence (eschewing any mention of
results for classiﬁcation up to isomorphism).

In addition to giving an update on current research, the author believes that the
narrative, like many instances of mathematical investigation, provides an interesting
story of the twists and turns that have occurred as several researchers have con-
tributed to an area of investigation.

4

2 Preliminaries

Mark Tomforde

In this section we establish notation and state some standard deﬁnitions. To begin,
we mention that we shall allow inﬁnite graphs, but work under the standing hypoth-
esis that all our graphs are countable.

Deﬁnition 1. A graph (E0,E1,r,s) consists of a countable set E0 of vertices, a
countable set E1 of edges, and maps r : E1 → E0 and s : E1 → E0 identifying the
range and source of each edge. A graph is ﬁnite if both the vertex set E0 and the
edge set E1 are ﬁnite.

Let E := (E0,E1,r,s) be a graph. We say that a vertex v ∈ E0 is a sink if s−1(v) = /0,
and we say that a vertex v ∈ E0 is an inﬁnite emitter if |s−1(v)| = ¥
. A singular
vertex is a vertex that is either a sink or an inﬁnite emitter, and we denote the set of
singular vertices by E0
sing, and refer to the elements
reg as regular vertices; i.e., a vertex v ∈ E0 is a regular vertex if and only if
of E0
0 < |s−1(v)| < ¥

sing. We also let E0

reg := E0 \ E0

.

2.1 Deﬁnitions of Graph Algebras

Graph C∗-algebras were introduced in the 1990s, motivated by (and generalizing)
earlier constructions, such as the Cuntz algebras and the Cuntz-Krieger algebras.

Deﬁnition 2 (The Graph C∗-algebra). If E is a graph, the graph C∗-algebra C∗(E)
is the universal C∗-algebra generated by mutually orthogonal projections {pv : v ∈
E0} and partial isometries with mutually orthogonal ranges {se : e ∈ E1} satisfying
1. s∗
2. ses∗
3. pv = (cid:229)

for all e ∈ E1
for all e ∈ E1

ese = pr(e)
e ≤ ps(e)

for all v ∈ E0

{e∈E1:s(e)=v} ses∗
e

reg.

Based on the success of graph C∗-algebras, in 2005 algebraists were inspired to
deﬁne algebraic analogues, which are called Leavitt path algebras.

Deﬁnition 3 (The Leavitt Path Algebra). Let E be a graph, and let K be a ﬁeld. We
let (E1)∗ denote the set of formal symbols {e∗ : e ∈ E1}. The Leavitt path algebra of
E with coefﬁcients in K, denoted LK(E), is the free associative K-algebra generated
by a set {v : v ∈ E0} of pairwise orthogonal idempotents, together with a set {e,e∗ :
e ∈ E1} of elements, modulo the ideal generated by the following relations:
1. s(e)e = er(e) = e for all e ∈ E1
2. r(e)e∗ = e∗s(e) = e∗ for all e ∈ E1
3. e∗ f = d e, f r(e) for all e, f ∈ E1
4. v =

ee∗ whenever v ∈ E0

reg.

{e∈E1:s(e)=v}

(cid:229)
Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

5

As with the graph C∗-algebras, the Leavitt path algebras include many well-known
classes of algebras and have been studied intensely in the algebra community since
their introduction. The interplay between these two classes of “graph algebras” has
been extensive and mutually beneﬁcial — graph C∗-algebra results have helped to
guide the development of Leavitt path algebras by suggesting what results are true
and in what direction investigations should be focused, and Leavitt path algebras
have given a better understanding of graph C∗-algebras by helping to identify those
aspects of C∗(E) that are algebraic, rather than C∗-algebraic, in nature. Moreover,
results from each class have had nontrivial applications to the other, and the work
of researchers from each side has guided discovery for the other. Indeed, nearly ev-
ery theorem from each class seems to have a corresponding theorem in the other.
For example, the graph-theoretic conditions on E for which C∗(E) is a simple al-
gebra (respectively, an AF-algebra, a purely inﬁnite simple algebra, an exchange
ring, a ﬁnite-dimensional algebra) in the category of C∗-algebras are precisely the
same graph-theoretic conditions on E for which LK(E) is a simple algebra (respec-
tively, an ultramatricial algebra, a purely inﬁnite simple algebra, an exchange ring,
a ﬁnite-dimensional algebra) in the category of K-algebras. The exact reason for
these similar properties is a bit of a mystery — the graph C∗-algebra and Leavitt
path algebra theorems are proven using different techniques, and the theorems for
one class do not seem to imply the theorems for the other in any obvious way. It has
been suggested that there may exist some kind of “Rosetta Stone” that would allow
for translating and deducing one set of theorems from the other, but currently such
a Rosetta Stone remains elusive.

We mention that when the underlying ﬁeld of the Leavitt path is the complex
numbers, then LC(E) is isomorphic to a dense ∗-subalgebra of C∗(E). However,
this alone is not enough to account for the similar results, since it is possible for
dense ∗-subalgebras to have considerably different properties and structure from
the ambient C∗-algebra.

It is also noteworthy that the ﬁeld plays little role in most theorems for the Leavitt
path algebras, and properties of LK(E) are frequently obtained entirely in terms of
the graph E with no dependence on the ﬁeld K. We will see in the ﬁnal section of
this survey that classiﬁcation by K-theory is one of the few examples where this
is not true, and the underlying ﬁeld will be important in our theorems and in the
invariants used for classiﬁcation of simple Leavitt path algebras.

2.2 Computation of K-groups

We shall use the notation Kn(A) for the nth topological K-group of a C∗-algebra
A, and we shall use the notation Kalg
n (R) for the nth algebraic K-group of a ring
R. Due to a phenomenon called Bott periodicity, for any C∗-algebra A we have
Kn(A) ∼= Kn+2(A) for all n ∈ Z. Thus for C∗-algebras, all K-group information is
contained in the K0-group and K1-group, and these are typically the only K-groups

6

Mark Tomforde

mentioned. For rings (and Leavitt path algebras) there is no periodicity and all the
algebraic K-groups may be distinct.

Computation of the topological K-groups of a graph C∗-algebra and the alge-
braic K-groups of a Leavitt path algebra is described in the following deﬁnition and
proposition.

Deﬁnition 4. If E = (E0,E1,r,s) is a graph, we deﬁne the vertex matrix AE to be the
(possible inﬁnite) square matrix indexed by the vertex set E0, and for each v,w ∈ E0
the entry AE (v,w) is equal to the number of edges in E from v to w. Note that the
entries of AE take values in {0,1,2, . . .,¥ }.

In the following proposition, for a set X and an abelian group G, we use the notation

GX := Lx∈X G.
Proposition 1 (Computation of K-groups for Graph Algebras). Let E be a graph
and decompose the vertices of E as E0 = E0
sing, and with respect to this de-
composition write the vertex matrix of E as

reg ⊔ E0

AE =(cid:18)BE CE
∗ ∗ (cid:19)

where BE and CE have entries in Z and the ∗’s have entries in Z ∪ {¥ }. For each v ∈
E0, let d v ∈ ZE0 denote the vector with 1 in the vth position and 0’s elsewhere, and for
x ∈ ZE0 let [x] denote the equivalence class of x in coker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt
reg → ZE0(cid:19).

E (cid:19) : ZE0

−Ct

E

(a)The topological K-theory of the graph C∗-algebra may be calculated as follows:

We have

K0(C∗(E)) ∼= coker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt

−Ct

E

E (cid:19) : ZE0

reg → ZE0(cid:19)

via an isomorphism that takes [pv]0 7→ [d v] and takes the positive cone of
K0(C∗(E)) to the cone of coker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt
reg → ZE0(cid:19) generated by the el-

E (cid:19) : ZE0

−Ct

E

{[pv − (cid:229)

e∈F

ses∗

e ] : v ∈ E0,F ⊆ s−1(v), and F ﬁnite},

K1(C∗(E)) ∼= ker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt

−Ct

E

E (cid:19) : ZE0

reg → ZE0(cid:19) .

ements

and we have

(b)If K is any ﬁeld, then the algebraic K-theory of the Leavitt path algebra LK(E)

may be calculated as follows: We have

0 (LK(E)) ∼= coker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt
Kalg

−Ct

E

E (cid:19) : ZE0

reg → ZE0(cid:19)

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

7

via an isomorphism that takes [v]0 7→ [d v] and takes the positive cone of Kalg
to the cone of coker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt
reg → ZE0(cid:19) generated by the elements

E (cid:19) : ZE0

−Ct

E

0 (LK(E))

{[v − (cid:229)

e∈F

ee∗] : v ∈ E0,F ⊆ s−1(v), and F ﬁnite},

and we have

1 (LK(E)) ∼= ker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt
Kalg

−Ct

E

E (cid:19) : ZE0
⊕ coker(cid:18)(cid:18)I − Bt

reg → ZE0(cid:19)
E (cid:19) : (Kalg

−Ct

E

1 (K))E0

reg → (Kalg

1 (K))E0(cid:19)

with (Kalg

1 (K), +) ∼= (K×, ·). Moreover, there is a long exact sequence

(cid:18) I−Bt
E (cid:19)

E
−Ct

n (K)E0
Kalg

reg

/ Kalg

n (K)E0

/ Kalg

n (LK(E))

/ Kalg

n−1(K)E0

reg

for n ∈ Z.

Remark: When E has no singular vertices (which occurs, for example, whenever E
E in all

is ﬁnite with no sinks), then one may make the substitution (cid:16) I−Bt

E (cid:17) = I − At

E
−Ct

the above expressions.

Throughout this survey we shall be concerned with classiﬁcation of C∗-algebras
and algebras up to Morita equivalence. If A is an algebra (or C∗-algebra) from a
given class, and an object I(A) is assigned to A, we call the assignment a Morita
equivalence invariant for the class if

A Morita equivalent to B =⇒ I(A) = I(B)

for all A,B in the class

and we call the assignment a complete Morita equivalence invariant for the class if

A Morita equivalent to B ⇐⇒ I(A) = I(B)

for all A,B in the class.

3 Classiﬁcation of Simple and Nonsimple Graph C∗-algebras

All graph C∗-algebras are nuclear and in the bootstrap class to which the UCT ap-
plies. Furthermore, the standing assumption that our graphs are countable ensures
the associated graph C∗-algebras are separable. Simple graph C∗-algebras are ei-
ther AF (and classiﬁed by Elliott’s theorem) or purely inﬁnite (and classiﬁed by the
Kirchberg-Phillips classiﬁcation theorem). Consequently, when E is a graph and
C∗(E) is simple, the pair

/
/
/
8

Mark Tomforde

((K0(C∗(E)),K0(C∗(E))+),K1(C∗(E)))

consisting of the (pre-)ordered K0-group together with the K1-group is a com-
plete Morita equivalence invariant for C∗(E). By looking at the ordering on the
K0-group, we can tell whether C∗(E) is purely inﬁnite or AF: If K0(C∗(E))+ =
K0(C∗(E)), then C∗(E) is purely inﬁnite and the invariant reduces to the pair
(K0(C∗(E)),K1(C∗(E)); while if K0(C∗(E))+ ( K0(C∗(E)), then C∗(E) is AF,
K1(C∗(E)) = 0, and the ordered K0-group (K0(C∗(E)),K0(C∗(E))+) classiﬁes C∗(E)
up to Morita equivalence.

While the classiﬁcation of simple graph C∗-algebras is a special case of the ex-
isting classiﬁcation theorems for simple nuclear C∗-algebras (speciﬁcally Elliott’s
theorem and the Kirchberg-Phillips classiﬁcation theorem), rather than merely con-
sidering the graph C∗-algebra result as a corollary, it perhaps better to take a his-
torical view and think of simple graph C∗-algebras as the test cases that provided
intermediate steps successively leading to more general theorems for classifying
simple nuclear C∗-algebras. Indeed, the classiﬁcation of AF-algebras up to Morita
equivalence given by Elliott’s theorem, which initiated the entire classiﬁcation pro-
gram, is tantamount to classifying C∗-algebras of graphs with no cycles (since the
two classes coincide up to Morita equivalence). Likewise, the purely inﬁnite simple
graph C∗-algebras (especially particular subclasses) provided important initial steps
leading to the Kirchberg-Phillips Classiﬁcation theorem.

For example, Cuntz ﬁrst calculated the K-theory of the Cuntz algebra On (which
is the C∗-algebra of a graph with one vertex and n edges) in the paper [3], showing
that K0(On) ∼= Z/nZ. This implies a very speciﬁc case of the Kirchberg-Phillips
theorem for the Cuntz algebras: Om is Morita equivalent to On ⇐⇒ K0(Om) ∼=
K0(On) ⇐⇒ m = n.

Likewise, the classiﬁcation of simple Cuntz-Krieger algebras was an important
early step in the classiﬁcation program. (The Cuntz-Krieger algebras are precisely
the C∗-algebras of ﬁnite graphs with no sinks or sources.) Simple Cuntz-Krieger
algebras are purely inﬁnite and classiﬁed up to Morita equivalence by their K0-
group. (The K1-group turns out to be redundant, because the K1-group of a Cuntz-
Krieger algebra is isomorphic to the free part of the K0-group.) The groundwork for
this classiﬁcation was laid by Cuntz and Krieger [4], who recognized the connection
with dynamics, and the ﬁnal portions of the classiﬁcation were later established by
Rørdam (using an important lemma outlined by Cuntz in a talk) [15]. We will return
to this result, its proof, and the connection with dynamics in the next section.

In addition to providing stepping stones toward more general classiﬁcation the-
orems for simple nuclear C∗-algebras, the graph C∗-algebras have also provided a
class for exploring classiﬁcation of nonsimple C∗-algebras. In a graph C∗-algebra
with ﬁnitely many ideals, each quotient and each ideal is Morita equivalent to a
graph C∗-algebra, so any graph C∗-algebra with ﬁnitely many ideals may be built up
from the simple graph C∗-algebras by taking extensions a ﬁnite number of times.

The invariant used to classify a nonsimple graph C∗-algebra C∗(E) is called the
ﬁltered (or sometimes “ﬁltrated”) K-theory and denoted FK+
X (C∗(E)), where X is
the primitive ideal space of C∗(E). The ﬁltered K-theory contains the collection of

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

9

all ordered K0-groups and K1-groups of subquotients of the C∗-algebra, taking into
account all the natural transformations among them (see [6, §1] for a precise def-
inition). When C∗(E) has a single (nonzero) ideal, the ﬁltered K-theory is simply
the six-term exact sequence in K-theory (including the ordering on all K0-groups)
determined by the unique ideal. Eilers and the author [8] proved that the ﬁltered K-
theory (i.e., the six-term exact sequence) is a complete Morita equivalence invariant
for the class of graph C∗-algebras with one ideal. This kicked off a ﬂurry activity
in which several researchers established classiﬁcation results for graph C∗-algebras
with multiple ideals. A summary of these results and description of the status quo
for this program can be found in the survey [6] — in particular, the authors there de-
scribe how we have a complete classiﬁcation of graph C∗-algebras with a primitive
ideal space having three or fewer points, and for graph C∗-algebras whose primi-
tive ideal space has four points 103 of the 125 cases have been solved, leaving less
than one ﬁfth of the cases open. In addition, as we will discuss at the end of Sec-
tion 4, Eilers, Restorff, and Ruiz recently announced that they have recently shown
that ﬁltered K-theory is a complete Morita equivalence invariant for all unital graph
C∗-algebras.

4 In Search of Techniques to Classify Algebras: Shift Spaces,

Flow Equivalence, and Moves on Graphs

Many of the techniques used to establish classiﬁcation theorems for C∗-algebras
have no hope of going through for general algebras. Indeed, the classiﬁcation proofs
frequently make use of the C∗-algebra structure (e.g., the completeness is used fre-
quently to take limits). As one undertakes a classiﬁcation of algebras, the ﬁrst step
is to begin with simple algebras. In addition, it is sensible to restrict initial attention
to algebras that are somehow similar to the C∗-algebras for which the classiﬁcation
program had early successes using more modest methods. The graph C∗-algebras
(particularly the Cuntz-Krieger algebras) are such a class, and hence their alge-
braic analogues, the Leavitt path algebras (particularly Leavitt path algebras of ﬁnite
graphs), arise as natural candidates for attempts at classiﬁcation.

Simple Leavitt path algebras exhibit a dichotomy similar to simple graph C∗-
algebras: A simple Leavitt path algebra is either ultramatricial (if the graph has no
cycles) or purely inﬁnite (if the graph has a cycle). In the ultramatricial case, Elliott’s
theorem applies and the Leavitt path algebra is classiﬁed by its ordered K0-group.
In the purely inﬁnite case, we seek an algebraic analogue of the Kirchberg-Phillips
classiﬁcation theorem, and therefore we look at how the classiﬁcation was obtained
for early investigations into special cases — more speciﬁcally, we shall carefully
examine the classiﬁcation of simple Cuntz-Krieger algebras.

The Cuntz-Krieger algebras correspond to C∗-algebras of ﬁnite graphs with no
sinks and no sources, and the simplicity of the Cuntz-Krieger algebras corresponds
to the graph being strongly connected (i.e., for each pair of vertices v and w there is a
path from v to w and a path from w to v) and not a single cycle. Let E = (E0,E1,r,s)

10

Mark Tomforde

be a ﬁnite graph with no sinks and no sources. One may deﬁne the (two-sided) shift
space

XE := {. . . e−2e−1.e0e1e2 . . . : ei ∈ E1 and r(ei) = s(ei+1) for all i ∈ Z}

consisting of all bi-inﬁnite paths in the graph, together with the shift map s
: XE →
XE given by s (. . . e−2e−1.e0e1e2 . . .) = . . .e−1e0.e1e2e3 . . .. Cuntz and Krieger ob-
served a connection between the (characterizations of) ﬂow equivalence of this dy-
namical system and the Morita equivalence class of the C∗-algebra associated with
the graph.

If E and F are ﬁnite graphs with no sinks and no sources, the shift spaces XE
and XF are ﬂow equivalent if their suspension ﬂows are homeomorphic via a home-
omorphism that carries orbits to orbits and preserves each orbit’s orientation. A
precise deﬁnition of ﬂow equivalence may be found in [12, §13.6], but as we shall
see shortly, for the purposes of this survey one does not need to understand ﬂow
equivalence so much as note that it is equivalent to other conditions.

Franks gave an algebraic characterization of ﬂow equivalence for strongly con-
nected graphs: If E and F are strongly connected ﬁnite graphs, then XE and XF
are ﬂow equivalent if and only if coker(1 − At
F ) and sgn(det(1 −
E )) = sgn(det(1−At
At
F). Here AE is the vertex matrix of the graph E, and sgn(det(1−
At
E )) is the sign of the number det(1 − At
In addition, Parry and Sullivan gave a different characterization of ﬂow equiva-
lence based on “moves”; i.e., operations that may be performed on the graph and
which preserve ﬂow equivalence of the associated shift space. Parry and Sullivan
needed three moves for their characterization, which are named as follows:

E); i.e., the value +, −, or 0.

E ) = coker(1 − At

Move (O): Outsplitting

Move (I): Insplitting

Move (R): Reduction

Precise deﬁnitions of these moves can be found in [18, §3], but for the purposes of
this survey any readers unfamiliar with the moves may be better served by informal
descriptions: Outsplitting allows one to partition the outgoing edges of a vertex into
nonempty sets and “split” the vertex and incoming edges so that each set of outgoing
edges from the partition now emits from its own vertex. Insplitting allows one to
partition the ingoing edges of a vertex into nonempty sets and “split” the vertex and
outgoing edges so that each set of ingoing edges from the partition now enters its
own vertex. Reduction allows one to “collapse” certain vertices that have a single
edge going from one vertex to the other.

For each move there is also an inverse move, so that if a Move X is applied to the
graph E to obtain the graph E ′, we say E is obtained by performing the inverse of
Move X to E ′. Although we will not need their names, for the reader’s ediﬁcation
we mention that the inverse of outsplitting is called outamalgamation, the inverse
of insplitting is called inamalgamation, and the inverse of reduction is called delay.
Parry and Sullivan proved that if E and F are strongly connected graphs, then XE
and XF are ﬂow equivalent if and only if the graph E may turned into the graph F
by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves (O), (I), (R), and their inverses.

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

11

Combining Franks result with the result of Parry and Sullivan, we thus obtain the

following:

Theorem 1 (Franks, Parry and Sullivan). Let E and F be strongly connected ﬁnite
graphs. Then the following are equivalent:

(1) The shift spaces XE and XF are ﬂow equivalent.
(2) coker(1 − At
(3) The graph E may turned into the graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves

F) and sgn(det(1 − At

E) = coker(1 − At

E)) = sgn(det(1 − At

F)).

(O), (I), (R), and their inverses.

Cuntz and Krieger had multiple insights to recognize the relationship of ﬂow
equivalence with the Morita equivalence of Cuntz-Krieger algebras. First, after cal-
culating the K-groups of a Cuntz-Krieger algebra, Cuntz and Krieger observed that
the K0-group coincides with the group coker(1 − At
E) appearing in the ﬂow equiv-
alence classiﬁcation. (This group is sometimes called the Bowen-Franks group by
dynamicists.) The second important observation of Cuntz and Krieger was that the
Moves (O), (I), (R) (and consequently their inverses) preserve Morita equivalence
of the associated C∗-algebra.

These observations, combined with Theorem 1, imply that if E and F are strongly
connected ﬁnite graphs with isomorphic K0-groups and with sgn(det(1 − At
E)) =
sgn(det(1 − At
F)), then E can be transformed into F using a ﬁnite number of Moves
(O), (I), (R) and their inverses, and consequently the C∗-algebras of E and F are
Morita equivalent. (Note that we really only need the equivalence of (2) and (3) in
Theorem 1, and for the purposes of Cuntz and Krieger’s result, we can completely
ignore the notion of ﬂow equivalence if we wish, viewing (2) ⇐⇒ (3) as a purely
combinatorial fact about graphs.)

Although Cuntz and Krieger formulated their study of the Cuntz-Krieger algebras
in terms of matrices, we wish to use the more modern approach of describing the
C∗-algebras in terms of graphs. The Cuntz-Krieger algebras may be thought of as
the C∗-algebras of ﬁnite graphs with no sinks or sources. If a graph C∗-algebra is
simple and purely inﬁnite, then the graph cannot contain a sink, so when we restrict
to the simple purely inﬁnite case we automatically have the “no sinks” condition for
Cuntz-Krieger algebras. However, we do need a method to deal with sources, and to
accomplish this we introduce a new move:

Move (S): Source Removal

A precise deﬁnition of Move (S) can be found in [18, §3], but an informal description
is fairly accurate and informative: To perform Move (S) we select a source vertex
in the graph and then remove this vertex and all edges beginning at this vertex. As
with the other moves, Move (S) preserves Morita equivalence of the associated C∗-
algebra. The is also an inverse move called source addition. Note that the process
of performing Move (S) removes a source, but may create other sources in doing
so. Nonetheless, one can easily show that in a ﬁnite graph with no sinks, repeated
applications of Move (S) will ultimately (and in a ﬁnite number of steps) result in a
graph with no sources.

12

Mark Tomforde

The following is a reformulation of Cuntz and Krieger’s result in the language of

graphs that also takes the presence of sources into account.

Theorem 2 (Cuntz and Krieger). Let E and F be ﬁnite graphs for which C∗(E) and
C∗(F) are simple and purely inﬁnite. If K0(C∗(E)) ∼= K0(C∗(F)) and sgn(det(1 −
At
E )) = sgn(det(1 − At
F )), then C∗(E) is Morita equivalent to C∗(F). Moreover, in
this case, the graph E may turned into the graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of
Moves (S), (O), (I), (R), and their inverses.

Cuntz and Krieger suspected that sgn(det(1 − At

E)) was not a necessary condi-
tion for Morita equivalence of the C∗-algebras, but they were unable to remove the
hypothesis from their theorem. It was not until 15 years later that Rørdam was able
to remove the “sign of the determinant” condition and obtain a complete Morita
equivalence invariant for Cuntz-Krieger algebras. To accomplish this, Rørdam used
an additional graph move that did not appear in the study of ﬂow equivalence. This
move is called the Cuntz splice, and because it will be important for us in the re-
mainder of this survey, we shall describe it in greater detail than the other moves.

Move (CS): Cuntz Splice

If E is a graph and v is any vertex in E that is the base of two distinct cycles, then
Move (CS) is performed by ”splicing” on the following additional portion to E:

v

* v1

v2

Here is an example showing the Cuntz splice performed on a graph with two vertices
and three edges to produce a new graph with four vertices and nine edges.

Example 1.

•$

) v

Cuntz splice

=⇒

•$

) v

* v1

v2

Unlike the other moves, we shall have no need of an inverse move for the Cuntz
splice. The usefulness of the Cuntz splice is due to the following fact: If E is a
graph and E − is obtained by performing a Cuntz splice to a vertex of E, then
K0(C∗(E)) ∼= K0(C∗(E −)) and sgn(det(I − At
E−)). In other
words, the Cuntz splice preserves the K0-group of the associated C∗-algebra while
“ﬂipping” the sign of the determinant. Rørdam’s main contribution was to prove that
the Cuntz splice preserves Morita equivalence of the associated C∗-algebra. Using
this fact, one can start with two purely inﬁnite simple graph C∗-algebras having the
same K0-group. If the signs of the determinants are the same, simply apply Theo-
rem 2 to deduce Morita equivalence. If not, apply the Cuntz splice once to one of the
graphs to switch the sign of the determinant, and then apply Theorem 2 to deduce
Morita equivalence. Rørdam phrased his result in terms of the matrix description

E )) = − sgn(det(I − At

*
i
i
*
*


j
j
f
f
$
)
i
i
$
)
i
i
*
i
i
*
*


j
j
f
f
Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

13

of Cuntz-Krieger algebras, but we reformulate it here in the modern language of
graphs, which also takes the presence of sources into account.

Theorem 3 (Rørdam). Let E and F be ﬁnite graphs for which C∗(E) and C∗(F)
are simple and purely inﬁnite. Then the following are equivalent:

(1) C∗(E) is Morita equivalent to C∗(F).
(2) K0(C∗(E)) ∼= K0(C∗(F)).
(3) The graph E may turned into the graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves
(S) (O), (I), (R), and their inverses, and at most one application of Move (CS).
Moreover, no applications of Move (CS) are needed if sgn(det(1 − At
E )) =
sgn(det(1 − At
F )), and exactly one application of Move (CS) is required other-
wise.

Theorem 3 shows that K0(C∗(E)) is a complete invariant for Morita equivalence
in the class of simple purely inﬁnite C∗-algebras of ﬁnite graphs. Even better than
that, Theorem 3 gives moves on the graph generating the equivalence relation (in
analogy to moves for other equivalence relations, such as the Reidemeister moves
for the isotopy class of a knot). This allows one to turn the question of Morita equiv-
alence of the C∗-algebras into a combinatorial problem on graphs. For this reason,
the moves of Theorem 3 are sometimes said to give a “geometric classiﬁcation” of
these graph C∗-algebras.

In addition, for ﬁnite graphs whose C∗-algebras are purely inﬁnite and simple,
Theorem 1 and Theorem 3 explain the precise relationship between ﬂow equiv-
alence of the shift space and Morita equivalence of the C∗-algebra. In particular,
K0(C∗(E)) is a complete invariant for Morita equivalence of C∗(E), and the pair
(K0(C∗(E)),sgn(det(1 − At
E))) is a complete invariant for ﬂow equivalence of XE.
Consequently, for these graphs the ﬂow equivalence of the shift space is a ﬁner
equivalence relation than Morita equivalence of the C∗-algebra (i.e., XE ﬂow equiv-
alent to XF implies that C∗(E) is Morita equivalent to C∗(F), but not conversely in
general).

After Rørdam’s work and this geometric classiﬁcation of Cuntz-Krieger alge-
bras, efforts in the classiﬁcation program progressed in ways that were less “geo-
metric”. However, in 2005 Abrams and Aranda Pino introduced Leavitt path alge-
bras. In 2008, approximately 13 years after the geometric classiﬁcation for simple
Cuntz-Krieger algebras was obtained, Abrams, Louly, Pardo, and Smith were in-
spired to seek a similar geometric classiﬁcation for simple Leavitt path algebras of
ﬁnite graphs [2]. We will discuss the Leavitt path algebra classiﬁcation in Section 5,
and as with graph C∗-algebras we shall see the sign of the determinant condition
is a stumbling block. Unlike the C∗-algebra situation, however, this problem has
not been resolved and it is an open question as to whether the sign of the determi-
nant may be removed. We will discuss the ramiﬁcations of this question, and the
implications of possible answers, in the next section.

With Leavitt path algebra considerations causing attention to be returned to a
geometric classiﬁcation, Sørensen had the novel idea to reconsider the graph C∗-
algebras and seek geometric classiﬁcations for simple C∗-algebras of inﬁnite graphs

14

Mark Tomforde

[19]. Although the Kirchberg-Phillips theorem, established in 2000, showed that the
pair of the K0-group and K1-group is a complete Morita equivalence invariant for
purely inﬁnite simple graph C∗-algebras, the result is highly non-geometric and does
not allow one to establish the Morita equivalence in any concrete or constructive
way. Sørensen’s key insight was to realize that classiﬁcation by moves could still be
obtained when the graph has a ﬁnite number of vertices and an inﬁnite number of
edges. In this case, the K-groups of the C∗-algebras are obtained as the cokernel and
kernel of a ﬁnite rectangular (but not square) matrix indexed by the vertices. In this
situation, due to the fact there are inﬁnitely many edges, one cannot deﬁne a shift
space as before. This is because deﬁnition of a shift spaces requires a ﬁnite alphabet
(i.e., ﬁnitely many edges) from which each position in the bi-inﬁnite sequences may
be chosen. Despite this, one can still focus on the equivalence of (2) and (3) in
Theorem 1, considering it as a purely combinatorial fact about graphs, and seek
an analogous result for inﬁnite graphs with ﬁnitely many vertices. As one would
E) ∼= K0(C∗(E)) from the ﬁnite graph case must now
expect, the object coker(I − At
be replaced by the pair (K0(C∗(E)),K1(C∗(E)). It is less clear what quantity should
play the analogous role of sgn(det(I − At
E)), since the matrix involved is not square
and hence its determinant does not exist. Surprisingly, Sørensen proved that the sign
of the determinant condition simply disappears in the presence of inﬁnitely many
edges, and — in what is even better news — this means there is no need for the
Cuntz splice. Sørensen’s results from [19] may be summarized as follows.

Theorem 4 (Sørensen). Let E and F be graphs with a ﬁnite number of vertices and
an inﬁnite number of edges and with the property that C∗(E) and C∗(F) are simple.
Then the following are equivalent:

(1) C∗(E) is Morita equivalent to C∗(F).
(2) K0(C∗(E)) ∼= K0(C∗(F)) and K1(C∗(E)) ∼= K1(C∗(F)).
(3) The graph E may turned into the graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves

(S), (O), (I), (R), their inverses.

The fact that Sørensen’s result does not involve the Cuntz splice has two im-
portant consequences: First, the moves (S), (O), (I), (R), and their inverses produce
explicit Morita equivalences, and consequently one can concretely construct the im-
primitivity bimodule linking C∗(E) to C∗(F) by using full corners of the C∗-algebras
of the intermediary graphs between E and F. (The Cuntz splice does not produce an
explicit Morita equivalence, so this concrete construction cannot be accomplished
for the ﬁnite graphs in Theorem 3 when sgn(det(1 − At
F)).) Sec-
ond, when seeking a version of Theorem 4 for Leavitt path algebras, the sign of the
determinant condition is no longer present to cause difﬁculties.

E)) 6= sgn(det(1 − At

A graph C∗-algebra C∗(E) is unital precisely when the graph E has a ﬁnite num-
ber of vertices. Since any unital simple graph C∗-algebra is either Morita equivalent
to C or purely inﬁnite, the combination of Theorem 3 and Theorem 4 gives a com-
plete classiﬁcation of unital simple graph C∗-algebras up to Morita equivalence.

In May 2015 Eilers, Restorff, Ruiz, and Sørensen posted a preprint [7] to the
arXiv in which they extended the geometric classiﬁcation to all unital graph C∗-

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

15

algebras of real rank zero. Speciﬁcally, they show that ﬁltered K-theory is a com-
plete Morita equivalence invariant for unital graph C∗-algebras of real rank zero,
and that when Morita equivalence occurs, one graph may be turned into the other
using a ﬁnite number of Moves (S), (O), (I), (R), their inverses, and Move (CS).
In July 2015, Eilers, Restorff, Ruiz, and Sørensen posted an update to their arXiv
entry stating that they are now able to remove the hypothesis of real rank zero and
give a geometric classiﬁcation for all unital graph C∗-algebras. They also stated that
the preprint [7] will not be published, and instead a paper with the more general re-
sults (containing all results of [7] as special cases) will be written and published in
its place (see http://front.math.ucdavis.edu/1505.06773). In talks,
Eilers has stated that the ﬁltered K-theory is a complete Morita equivalence invari-
ant for unital graph C∗-algebras and that a geometric classiﬁcation is possible. How-
ever, when the unital graph C∗-algebra is not real rank zero, we must include one
additional move besides Moves (S), (O), (I), (R), their inverses, and Move (CS),
in order to handle the situation of cycles with no exits. Since this additional move
was discovered while Eilers and Restorff were visiting Ruiz at his home institution
in Hawai’i, and since the move involves a graphical picture similar to a butterﬂy,
the authors have tentatively called the move “pulelehua” — the Hawaiian word for
butterﬂy.

5 Classiﬁcation of Leavitt Path Algebras of Finite Graphs

Since the Leavitt path algebras are deﬁned in a manner analogous to the graph C∗-
algebras, they are a natural candidate for a class of algebras that may be amenable to
classiﬁcation by K-theory. In addition, the geometric classiﬁcation of unital graph
C∗-algebras, described in terms of moves on the graph, provides a viable approach
to classiﬁcation for Leavitt path algebras.

Abrams, Louly, Pardo, and Smith initiated the classiﬁcation of Leavitt path al-
gebras in [2]. (A preprint of [2] was posted to the arXiv in 2008, and a published
version appeared in 2011.) To begin, they observed that for any graph E and any
ﬁeld K, one has Kalg
0 (LK(E)) ∼= K0(C∗(E)) so that the algebraic K0-group of the
Leavitt path algebra agrees with the K0-group of the graph C∗-algebra and is inde-
pendent of the ﬁeld K. In addition, Abrams, Louly, Pardo, and Smith proved that the
graph moves (S), (O), (I), (R), and their inverses preserve Morita equivalence of the
Leavitt path algebra of the graph. However, they were unable to determine whether
or not the Cuntz splice preserves Morita equivalence of the associated Leavitt path
algebra. Thus, following the proof strategy established by Cuntz and Krieger (with
later contributions by Rørdam), they could not avoid the sign of the determinant con-
dition and were only able to establish sufﬁcient conditions for Morita equivalence.
We state their result here.

Theorem 5 (Abrams, Louly, Pardo, and Smith). Let K be any ﬁeld, and let E
and F be ﬁnite graphs for which LK(E) and LK(F) are simple and purely inﬁnite. If

16

Mark Tomforde

Kalg
0 (LK(E)) ∼= Kalg
F), then LK(E) is
Morita equivalent to LK(F). Moreover, in this case, the graph E may turned into the
graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves (S), (O), (I), (R), and their inverses.

0 (LK(F)) and sgn(det(1 −At

E)) = sgn(det(1 −At

One noteworthy consequence of this result is that, as with most of the Leavitt path
algebra results, the ﬁeld plays no role in determining the Morita equivalence class
of the Leavitt path algebra for these particular types of graphs. Indeed, the invariant
sufﬁcient for classiﬁcation, the pair (Kalg
E))), depends only
on the graph E and is independent of the ﬁeld.

0 (LK(E)),sgn(det(1 − At

Currently, it is unknown whether the sign of the determinant is a Morita equiv-
alence invariant for Leavitt path algebras. This puts the classiﬁcation program for
simple Leavitt path algebras of ﬁnite graphs in a similar state that the classiﬁcation
of simple graph C∗-algebras found itself in during the 15 years period following
Cuntz and Krieger’s work and prior to Rørdam’s contribution of the Cuntz splice.
As a result, resolving whether the sign of the determinant can be removed is cur-
rently one of the central issues in the classiﬁcation of simple Leavitt path algebras.
This problem is equivalent to determining whether the Cuntz splice preserves Morita
equivalence, and thus the open question may be formulated as follows.

Open Question 1: Let K be a ﬁeld and let E be a ﬁnite graph such det(1 − At
E) 6= 0
and LK(E) is simple and purely inﬁnite. If E − denotes the graph obtained by per-
forming a Cuntz splice to E, then are the Leavitt path algebras LK(E) and LK(E −)
Morita equivalent?

This question has been open since the ﬁrst preprint of [2] appeared in 2008, and
it is currently at the forefront of the classiﬁcation program for Leavitt path algebras.
Many researchers have worked on this problem, but with little to show for their
efforts. In fact, we currently cannot answer the question in even elementary special
cases.

For example, suppose we take E2 to be the graph with one vertex and two edges
(arguably, the most basic example of the graphs the question is asking about), and
let E −

2 be the graph obtained by performing a Cuntz splice at the vertex of E.

E2

• 

E −
2

•

) •

•

Then LK(E2) is isomorphic to the Leavitt algebra L2, and we have Kalg
Kalg
0 (LK(E −
E−
2
rently an open question as to whether LK(E2) and LK(E −

0 (LK(E2)) ∼=
) = −1. However, it is cur-
2 ) are Morita equivalent.

E2) = 1, and det(1 − At

2 )) ∼= {0}, det(1 − At

Besides restricting the graph, another approach to ﬁnding a more tractable special
case of Open Question 1 is to restrict the ﬁeld, for instance to ﬁx K = C or K = Z2.
However, no results for this special case have been obtained either. Even combina-
tions of these restrictions (i.e., restricting both the graph and the ﬁeld) yield open


Z
Z

M
M
)
i
i
)
)


i
i
d
d
Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

17

problems — no one knows, for example, whether LC(E2) and LC(E −
equivalent, or whether LZ2 (E2) and LZ2(E −

2 ) are Morita equivalent.

2 ) are Morita

In July 2015, Johansen and Sørensen announced the preprint [11], which to the
author’s knowledge contain some of the ﬁrst concrete results concerning the sign of
the determinant condition. Although Leavitt path algebras are deﬁned over ﬁelds,
as noted by the author in [22], for any graph E and any commutative ring R it is
possible to construct a Leavitt path algebra LR(E) with coefﬁcients in R. Johansen
and Sørensen proved that if we choose the coefﬁcients to be the ring Z, then LZ(E2)
is not ∗-isomorphic to LZ(E −
2 ). (This is contrasted with the graph C∗-algebra sit-
uation, where C∗(E2) is ∗-isomorphic to C∗(E −
2 ).) Consequently, the Cuntz splice
does not preserve ∗-isomorphism of Leavitt path algebras over the ring Z. What this
means — if anything — for Morita equivalence (instead of ∗-isomorphism) of Leav-
itt path algebras over ﬁelds (instead of rings), is yet unclear. But at the very least,
Johansen and Sørensen’s result shows us that not all Cuntz splice results for graph
C∗-algebras will generalize to algebras over commutative rings, and this raises the
potential for some unexpected phenomena with Leavitt path algebras over ﬁelds.
More importantly, up to this point a preponderance of researchers’ efforts have been
spent trying to prove that the Cuntz splice does preserve Morita equivalence of Leav-
itt path algebras (over ﬁelds). Johansen and Sørensen’s result suggests that perhaps
we should be spending more time trying to establish the negative.

The lack of an answer to Open Question 1 is currently a major stumbling block
in the classiﬁcation program for Leavitt path algebras. The fact we do not have an
answer, even in special cases or for elementary examples, indicates there is some-
thing important about the structure of simple Leavitt path algebras that we do not
yet understand. In addition, Open Question 1 is not only an impediment for classi-
ﬁcation of simple Leavitt path algebras, but until we have a solution it essentially
impossible to classify nonsimple Leavitt path algebras of ﬁnite graphs — to do so,
we would most likely need to deal with the simple ideals and quotients, which are as
of yet unmanageable. Consequently, a solution to Open Question 1 is of paramount
importance for the classiﬁcation program for Leavitt path algebras.

Open Question 1 is compelling to the mathematical community not only for its
applications to classiﬁcation of algebras, but also because whatever the answer turns
out to be, it will have consequences for the subjects of Algebra, Functional Analy-
sis, and Dynamics. As the author sees it, there are three possible answers to Open
Question 1: “Yes”, “No”, and “Sometimes”.

If the answer is “Yes”, then this would provide further compelling evidence for
the existence of some sort of “Rosetta Stone” allowing for the translation of results
between graph C∗-algebras and Leavitt path algebras. Identifying the reason for
these similarities could lead to a deeper understanding of the relationships between
C∗-algebras and algebras. It could even serve as a call to action for more collabora-
tion between algebraists and analysts. Perhaps we can ﬁnd conditions under which
dense ∗-subalgebras of C∗-algebras have structural properties similar to their ambi-
ent C∗-algebras. Perhaps one can ﬁnd larger classes of algebras for which analogues
of C∗-algebra results can be proven. Or perhaps (if we dream big) a version of the

18

Mark Tomforde

Kirchberg-Phillips classiﬁcation theorem could be proved for a large class of purely
inﬁnite simple algebras.

0 (LK(E)),sgn(det(1 − At

If the answer is “No”, meaning the sign of the determinant is an invariant of
Morita equivalence, then the pair (Kalg
F ))) would be a com-
plete Morita equivalence invariant for simple Leavitt path algebras of ﬁnite graphs.
This would imply that for ﬁnite strongly connected graphs, the Morita equivalence
class of the Leavitt path algebra coincides exactly with the ﬂow equivalence class
of the graph’s shift space (cf. Theorem 1). Consequently, we would have that the
Leavitt path algebras and shift spaces are intimately related, suggesting that there
is some deeper, not yet understood connection between the algebras and the ﬂow
dynamics.

If the answer is “Sometimes”, meaning that for certain graphs changing the sign
of the determinant (or performing a Cuntz splice) changes the Morita equivalence
class of the Leavitt path algebra but for other graphs it does not, then we will need to
identify exactly which graphs are affected. This would be the most surprising (and
hence for a mathematician the most interesting!) outcome to this question. If indeed
the answer does turn out to be “Sometimes”, this outcome will likely motivate the
creation and development of new tools and require the collaboration of algebraists,
analysts, and dynamicists to investigate the phenomena that occur.

6 Classiﬁcation of Leavitt Path Algebras of Inﬁnite Graphs

As we saw in the previous section, the sign of the determinant condition (and un-
known effect of the Cuntz splice) creates an impediment to classifying simple Leav-
itt path algebras of ﬁnite graphs

However, if we continue to look to graph C∗-algebras for inspiration, we see that
Sørensen’s classiﬁcation of unital C∗-algebras of inﬁnite graphs avoided the sign of
the determinant and no Cuntz splice move was needed. One could therefore hope
for a similar classiﬁcation, using Sørensen’s techniques, for unital Leavitt path alge-
bras of inﬁnite graphs. (Such graphs have a ﬁnite number of vertices and an inﬁnite
number of edges.) This collection of graphs, while avoiding the Cuntz splice, intro-
duces a new problem: What is our candidate for the complete Morita equivalence
invariant? For C∗-algebras of ﬁnite graphs we used the K0-group, and when we con-
sidered Leavitt path algebras of ﬁnite graphs, we were in the fortunate situation that
for any graph E we have Kalg
0 (LK(E)) ∼= K0(C∗(E)). However, for graphs with in-
ﬁnitely many edges Sørensen now had to include the K1-group of the C∗-algebra.
In general, for a graph E one has that Kalg
1 (LK(E)) and K1(C∗(E)) are not equal. In
addition, due to Bott periodicity, a C∗-algebras really only has only two K-groups:
the K0-group and then K1-group. This means that by using K0 and K1, Sørensen was
including all the K-groups of the graph C∗-algebra in the invariant. For Leavitt path
algebras there is no periodicity and the algebraic K-groups Kalg
n (LK(E)) may all be
distinct. Furthermore, for n ≥ 1 one has that Kalg
n (LK(E)) depends on the under-

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

19

lying ﬁeld of the Leavitt path algebra. This raises the question as to which of the
algebraic K-groups Kalg
and Kalg
1
only? Some ﬁnite number of algebraic K-groups? All algebraic K-groups? Should
the number of K-groups included depend on the ﬁeld?

n (LK(E)) should be included in the invariant. Kalg
0

Inspired by the techniques of Sørensen in [19], Ruiz and the author looked for an
invariant that would provide the moves needed between the graphs without worrying
about whether this invariant involved the algebraic K-groups. It was found that a
complete Morita equivalence invariant is provided by the pair (Kalg
sing|).
Here |E0
sing. (Recall that a vertex
is singular if it either emits no edges or an inﬁnite number of edges.) Ruiz and the
author proved the following in [18].

sing| is the cardinality of the set of singular vertices E0

0 (LK(E)), |E0

Theorem 6 (Ruiz and Tomforde). Let K be a ﬁeld, and let E and F be graphs with
a ﬁnite number of vertices and an inﬁnite number of edges with the property that
LK(E) and LK(F) are simple. Then the following are equivalent:

(1) LK(E) is Morita equivalent to LK(F).
(2) Kalg
0 (LK(F)) and |E0
(3) The graph E may turned into the graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves

0 (LK(E)) ∼= Kalg

sing| = |F 0

sing|.

(S), (O), (I), (R), their inverses.
While this result shows that (Kalg

0 (LK(E)), |E0

sing|) is a complete Morita equiva-
lence invariant for unital simple Leavitt path algebras of inﬁnite graphs, this invari-
ant is unsatisfying because it depends on the choice of the graph used to represent
the Leavitt path algebra, rather than only on intrinsic properties of the algebra itself.
We prefer to have an invariant based solely on algebraic properties, and if our goal
is to lay groundwork for classiﬁcation of larger classes of algebras, we hope that we
can obtain an invariant described entirely in terms of K-theory.

Thus we ask whether or not some collection of the algebraic K-groups can pro-
vide a complete Morita equivalence invariant for unital simple Leavitt path algebras
of inﬁnite graphs — or, equivalently, whether |E0
sing| can be determined from some
collection of the algebraic K-groups.

In [18] Ruiz and the author showed that in certain situations the answer is “Yes”,
and surprisingly the answer depends on the underlying ﬁeld. (This is explained by
the fact that the higher algebraic K-groups of the Leavitt path algebra depend sig-
niﬁcantly on the underlying ﬁeld.) To describe the manageable ﬁelds, we need to
introduce a bit of terminology.

Deﬁnition 5. if G is an abelian group, we say G has no free quotients if no nonzero
quotient of G is a free abelian group. If K is a ﬁeld, we say K has no free quotients
if the multiplicative abelian group K× := K \ {0} has no free quotients.

It is shown in [18, Proposition 6.10] that the following are all examples of ﬁelds
with no free quotients.

• All ﬁelds K such that K× is a torsion group.
• All ﬁelds K such that K× is weakly divisible.

20

Mark Tomforde

• All algebraically closed ﬁelds.
• All ﬁelds that are perfect with characteristic p > 0.
• All ﬁnite ﬁelds.
• The ﬁeld C of complex numbers.
• The ﬁeld R of real numbers.
The ﬁeld Q is not a ﬁeld with no free quotients, because Q× ∼= Z2 ⊕ Z ⊕ Z ⊕ . . ..

In [18] Ruiz and the author showed that when the underlying ﬁeld has no free
quotients, the pair (Kalg
1 (LK(E))) is a complete Morita equivalence
invariant. We emphasize that this includes the case when the underlying ﬁeld is the
complex numbers.

0 (LK(E)),Kalg

Theorem 7 (Ruiz and Tomforde). Let K be a ﬁeld with no free quotients (see Def-
inition 5), and let E and F be graphs with a ﬁnite number of vertices and an inﬁnite
number of edges, and with the property that LK(E) and LK(F) are simple. Then the
following are equivalent:

(1) LK(E) is Morita equivalent to LK(F).
(2) Kalg
0 (LK(F)) and Kalg
(3) The graph E may turned into the graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves

0 (LK(E)) ∼= Kalg

1 (LK(E)) ∼= Kalg

1 (LK(F)).

(S), (O), (I), (R), their inverses.

Moreover, in [18, §11] Ruiz and the author produce an example of graphs E and
F with ﬁnitely many vertices, inﬁnitely many edges, and having the following prop-
erties: LQ(E) and LQ(F) are simple, Kalg
1 (LQ(E)) ∼=
Kalg
1 (LQ(F)), and Kalg
0 -groups and Kalg
1 -
groups of LQ(E) and LQ(F) are isomorphic, but LQ(E) and LQ(F) are not Morita
equivalent. Hence the pair of the Kalg
1 -group can fail to be a com-
plete Morita equivalence invariant when the underlying ﬁeld is not a ﬁeld with no
free quotients.

2 (LQ(F)). Thus the Kalg

2 (LQ(E)) 6∼= Kalg

0 -group and Kalg

0 (LQ(E)) ∼= Kalg

0 (LQ(F)), Kalg

This raises the question of whether higher algebraic K-groups can be included to
produce a complete Morita equivalence invariant for other ﬁelds. This was answered
afﬁrmatively for number ﬁelds in [10]. (Recall that a number ﬁeld is a ﬁeld that is a
ﬁnite extension of Q.) The following was proven in [10].

Theorem 8 (Gabe, Ruiz, Tomforde, and Whalen). Let K be a number ﬁeld, and
let E and F be graphs with a ﬁnite number of vertices and an inﬁnite number of
edges, and with the property that LK(E) and LK(F) are simple. Then the following
are equivalent:

(1) LK(E) is Morita equivalent to LK(F).
(2) Kalg
0 (LK(F)) and Kalg
(3) The graph E may turned into the graph F by ﬁnitely many applications of Moves

6 (LK(E)) ∼= Kalg

0 (LK(E)) ∼= Kalg

6 (LK(F)).

(S), (O), (I), (R), their inverses.
This shows that the pair (Kalg

6 (LK(E))) is a complete Morita equiv-
alence invariant for these Leavitt path algebras when the ﬁeld is a number ﬁeld. In

0 (LK(E)),Kalg

Classiﬁcation of graph algebras: A selective survey

21

addition, since Q is a number ﬁeld, this result covers the example produced by Ruiz
and the author in [18, §11].

The situation for other ﬁelds is unclear, and this leads us to an important open

question.

Open Question 2: Let K be a ﬁeld, and let E and F be graphs with a ﬁnite number
of vertices and an inﬁnite number of edges, and with the property that LK(E) and
LK(F) are simple. If Kalg
n (LK(F)) for all n ∈ N ∪ {0}, then is it the
case that LK(E) is Morita equivalent to LK(F)?

n (LK(E)) ∼= Kalg

In light of Theorem 6, Open Question 2 is equivalent to asking the following: “If K
is a ﬁeld and E is a graph with a ﬁnite number of vertices and an inﬁnite number of
edges, and for which LK(E) is simple, then is it possible to determine |E0
sing| from
the set of algebraic K-groups {Kalg

n (LK(E)) : n = 0,1,2 . . .}?”

Theorem 7 and Theorem 8 show that Open Question 2 has an afﬁrmative answer
when the ﬁeld either has no free quotients or is a number ﬁeld. This means that for
simple Leavitt path algebras over these ﬁelds the only missing part of a classiﬁcation
is to answer Open Question 1 and determine whether the sign of the determinant is
a Morita equivalence invariant in the case of ﬁnite graphs.

To obtain a classiﬁcation of all simple Leavitt path algebras by algebraic K-
theory, a positive answer to Open Question 2 is necessary. If the answer to Ques-
tion 2 is negative in general, then a general classiﬁcation in terms of algebraic K-
theory will not be possible and we will need to restrict our attention to Leavitt path
algebras over particular ﬁelds. Fortunately, for many ﬁelds of interest (e.g., C, R,
ﬁnite ﬁelds, Q, number ﬁelds) we already know that Open Question 2 has a positive
answer.

Acknowledgements The author thanks the organizers of the 2015 Abel Symposium, Christian
Skau (Norwegian University of Science and Technology), Toke M. Carlsen (University of the
Faroe Islands), Nadia Larsen (University of Oslo) and Sergey Neshveyev (University of Oslo) for
their hospitality and the opportunity to attend. This work, including the author’s travel to the Abel
Symposium, was supported by a grant from the Simons Foundation (#210035 to Mark Tomforde).

References

1. G. Abrams and G. Aranda Pino, The Leavitt path algebra of a graph, J. Algebra 293 (2005),

no. 2, 319–334.

2. G. Abrams, A. Louly, E. Pardo, and C. Smith, Flow invariants in the classiﬁcation of Leavitt

path algebras, J. Algebra 333 (2011), 202–231.

3. J. Cuntz, K-theory for certain C∗-algebras, Ann. Math. 113 (1981), 181–197.
4. J. Cuntz and W. Krieger, A class of C∗-algebras and topological Markov chains, Invent. Math.

56 (1980), 251–268.

5. D. Drinen, Viewing AF-algebras as graph algebras, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 128 (2000),

1991–2000.

22

Mark Tomforde

6. S. Eilers, G. Restorff, and E. Ruiz, Classiﬁcation of graph C∗-algebras with no more than
four primitive ideals, Operator algebra and dynamics, 89–129, Springer Proc. Math. Stat., 58,
Springer, Heidelberg, 2013.

7. S. Eilers, G. Restorff, E. Ruiz, and A. P. W. Sørensen, Geometric classiﬁcation of unital graph

C∗-algebras of real rank zero, preprint, 2015. arXiv:1505.06773 [math.OA]

8. S. Eilers and M. Tomforde, On the classiﬁcation of nonsimple graph C∗-algebras, Math. Ann.

346 (2010), 393–418.

9. G.A. Elliott, and A. Toms, Regularity properties in the classiﬁcation program for separable

amenable C∗-algebras, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 45 (2008), no. 2, 229–245.

10. J. Gabe, E. Ruiz, M. Tomforde, and T. Whalen, K-theory for Leavitt path algebras: computa-

tion and classiﬁcation, J. Algebra 433 (2015), 35–72.

11. R. Johansen and A. P. W. Sørensen, The Cuntz splice does not preserve ∗-isomorphism of

Leavitt path algebras over Z, preprint, 2015. arXiv:1507.01247 [math.RA]

12. D. Lind and B. Marcus, An Introduction to Symbolic Dynamics and Coding, Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1995.

13. R. Meyer and R. Nest, Ryszard, C∗-algebras over topological spaces: ﬁltrated K-theory,

Canad. J. Math. 64 (2012), no. 2, 368–408.

14. N. C. Phillips, A classiﬁcation theorem for nuclear purely inﬁnite simple C∗-algebras, Doc.

Math. 5 (2000), 49–114.

15. M. Rørdam, Classiﬁcation of Cuntz-Krieger algebras, K-theory 9 (1995), 31–58.
16. M. Rørdam, Classiﬁcation of Nuclear, Simple C∗-algebras, Encyclopaedia of Mathematical

Sciences, vol. 126, Springer, Berlin, 2001.

17. M. Rørdam, Structure and classiﬁcation of C∗-algebras, International Congress of Mathe-

maticians. Vol. II, 1581–1598, Eur. Math. Soc., Z¨urich, 2006.

18. E. Ruiz, and M. Tomforde, Classiﬁcation of unital simple Leavitt path algebras of inﬁnite

graphs, J. Algebra 384 (2013), 45–83.

19. A. P. W. Sørensen, Geometric classiﬁcation of simple graph algebras, Ergodic Theory Dy-

nam. Systems 33 (2013), no. 4, 1199–1220.

20. W. Szyma´nski, The range of K-invariants for C∗-algebras of inﬁnite graphs, Indiana Univ.

Math. J. 51 (2002), 239–249.

21. A. Tikuisis, S. White, and W. Winter, Quasidiagonality of nuclear C∗-algebras, preprint

(2015).

22. M. Tomforde, Leavitt path algebras with coefﬁcients in a commutative ring, J. Pure Appl.

Algebra 215 (2011), 471–484.

