6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
4
9
1
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–6 (0000)

Printed 22nd March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

A Monte Carlo estimate for the fraction of thermal
Comptonized photons that impinge back on the soft source
in neutron star LMXBs.

Nagendra Kumar1(cid:63) and Ranjeev Misra1†

1Inter-University Centre For Astronomy and Astrophysics, Post Bag4, Ganeshkind, Pune-411007, India

ABSTRACT
In earlier works, it was shown that the energy dependent soft time lags observed in
kHz QPOs of neutron star low mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs) can be explained as
being due to Comptonization lags provided a signiﬁcant fraction (η ∼ 0.2 - 0.8) of the
Comptonized photons impinge back into the soft photon source. Here we use a Monte
Carlo scheme to verify if such a fraction is viable or not. In particular we consider
three diﬀerent Comptonizing medium geometries: (i) a spherical shell, (ii) a boundary
layer like torus and (iii) a corona on top of an accretion disk. Two set of spectral
parameters corresponding to the ’hot’ and ’cold’ seed photon models were explored.
The general result of the study is that for a wide range of sizes, the fraction lies within
η ∼ 0.3 - 0.7, and hence compatible with the range required to explain the soft time
lags. Since there is a large uncertainty in the range, we cannot concretely rule out any
of the geometries or spectral models, but the analysis suggests that a boundary layer
type geometry with a ’cold’ seed spectral model is favoured over an accretion corona
model. Better quality data will allow one to constrain the geometry more rigorously.
Our results emphasise that there is signiﬁcant heating of the soft photon source by
the Comptonized photons and hence this eﬀect needs to be taken into account for any
detailed study of these sources.

Key words: stars: neutron – X-rays: binaries – X-rays: radiation mechanisms: ther-
mal

1 INTRODUCTION

X-ray binaries are close binary systems where the compact
object accretes matter from a companion star via an ac-
cretion disk. The compact object can be either a neutron
star or a black hole, while the companion star is a main
sequence one. The X-ray luminosity is usually generated in
the inner accretion disk near to the compact object. There
are two type of X-ray binaries, high mass X-ray binaries
(HMXBs) where the companion star is a O or B star, and
low mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs) where the companion star
is a K or M star. The X-ray binaries are categorised into
mainly two classes, transient and persistent, based on their
long term X-ray variability. They have in general two dis-
tinct spectral states, a high luminous soft state, which is
dominated by a black body like emission, and a low lumi-
nous hard state, which is dominated by power-law emission.
They also typically show a third intermediate or transitional
state where the X-ray ﬂux is highly variable on time scale

(cid:63) E-mail:nagendrak@iucaa.in
† E-mail:rmisra@iucaa.in

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS

of milliseconds to seconds. The variability is sometimes of a
quasi-periodic nature, and are termed as Quasi-periodic Os-
cillations, QPOs. In particular, Neutron star LMXBs have
millisecond variability and their kHz QPOs are positioned
in deﬁnite regions on their colour-colour plots (Altamirano
et al. 2008; Straaten, van der Klis, Mendez 2003). These
QPOs occur during the soft to hard state transition (see,
eg. Belloni, Mendez & Homan 2007); and they seem to have
no long term correlation with X-ray luminosity (Mendez et
al. 1999; Misra & Shanthi 2004).

Important insights into the nature of these oscillations
can be obtained by studying the fractional root mean square
r.m.s. amplitude, and phase delay or time-lag as a function of
energy which depend on the type of QPO and typically show
complex behaviour (see for review, van der Klis 2006, 2000;
Remillard & McClintock 2006; Tanaka & Shibazaki 1996).
The energy dependence of the r.m.s and time-lag contain
clues regarding the radiative processes that are involved in
the QPO phenomena.

Spectral ﬁtting reveals that thermal Comptonization is
the main radiative mechanism for hard X-ray generation in
X-ray binaries. In this process, the seed photons are Comp-

2 Kumar and Misra

tonized by an hot thermal electron cloud or corona. The
thermal Comptonization process is generally characterised
by three parameters, the seed photon source temperature
Tb, the corona temperature Te, and the optical depth of the
medium τ or the average number of scattering < Nsc >
that a photon would undergo (Sunyaev & Titarchuk 1980).
< Nsc > depends on the geometry of the corona and for
a given optical depth, it is generally diﬃcult to compute
analytically for arbitrary corona shapes. Since the domi-
nant spectral component in X-ray binaries is due to thermal
Comptonization, the energy dependent r.m.s and time-lag
of the QPOs may be related to the process. Indeed, the en-
ergy dependence of the r.m.s and time-lag for the lower kHz
QPO can be explained in terms of a thermal Comptonization
model and moreover, such an analysis can provide estimates
of the size and geometry of the corona (Lee & Miller 1998;
Lee, Misra & Taam 2001). In a more detailed work Kumar
& Misra (2014) studied the expected energy dependent time
lags and r.m.s for diﬀerent kinds of driving oscillations such
as in the seed photon temperature or in the coronal heating
rate, while self-consistently incorporating the heating and
cooling processes of the medium and the soft photon source.
They showed that the observed soft lag for the lower kHz
QPO could be obtained only when the driving oscillation is
in the heating rate of the corona and if a substantial frac-
tion, η of the Comptonized photons impinge back into the
soft photon source. However, the quantitative results ob-
tained depends on the the speciﬁc time-averaged spectral
model used for the analysis. Typically in the Rossi X-ray
Timing Experiment (RXTE), Proportional Counter Array
(PCA) energy band of 3-20 keV, there are two spectral mod-
els namely the “hot” and “cold” seed photon models which
are degenerate i.e. they both equally ﬁt the data of neutron
star LMXBs (Mitsuda et al. 1984; White et al. 1986; Barret
2001; Di Salvo & Stella 2002; Lin, Remillard & Homan 2007;
Cocchi et al. 2011). In, Kumar & Misra (2016, hereafter Pa-
per I), we employed both these spectral models to infer the
size of the medium and fraction of photons impinging on
the soft seed source, η for diﬀerent QPO frequencies of the
transient source 4U 1608-52. While both spectral models
can explain the r.m.s and time lag as a function of energy,
the range of the size of the medium for the hot seed photon
model 0.2-2.0 kms is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than when the
cold seed photon model is used, 1- 10 kms. Moreover, we
compared the measured soft lags between two broad energy
bands versus kHz QPO frequency (Barret 2013) with the
model predicted ones. We found that the width of medium
L decreases with QPO frequency for the hot-seed model, but
there is no such trend in cold-seed one, perhaps because the
allowed range of the size is larger. For both models, we ob-
tained the inferred ranges of L and η. Thus, it was shown
that while interpreting the time lag of the kHz QPO as being
due to Comptonization, can lead to estimates of the size of
the medium, it is necessary to have a reliable time-averaged
spectral model to do so.

A generic feature of the analysis was that since the ob-
served time lags are soft, there needs to be a signiﬁcant frac-
tion, η > 0.2 of the Comptonizing photons to impinge back
into the soft photon source. While in these earlier works it
has been treated as a parameter, in principle, it should be
computed for a given geometry. In this work, we endeavour
to do so, by implementing a Monte Carlo method to trace

the photons as they scatter, escape from the medium and
impinge into the soft photon source. The motivation here is
to compute η as a function of size and for diﬀerent simple
geometries. We will then compare the results with the con-
straints obtained in Paper I, to ﬁnd if any of the geometries
are more viable. We will neglect General relativistic eﬀects
and any bulk (including orbital) motion of the Comptoniz-
ing medium.

In the next section, we brieﬂy discuss the scheme of the
Monte Carlo method used for the thermal Comptonization
process. In Section 3, η is computed for three diﬀerent ge-
ometries of the Comptonizing system and in Section 5, the
results are summarised and discuss.

2 MONTE CARLO METHOD

In a Monte Carlo method a photon is tracked as it enters the
Comptonizing medium and scatters multiply till it leaves the
medium. The process is repeated for a large number of pho-
tons to build up the statistics that would give the emergent
spectrum as well as the direction of each outgoing photon.
The technique has been in use for several decades now (for
e.g., Sazonov & Sunyaev 2000; Zdziarski & Pjanka 2013).
Pozdnyakov, Sobol & Sunyaev (1983) have extensively re-
viewed the Monte Carlo method for the thermal Comp-
tonization process. The algorithm used in this work for the
Monte Carlo method in the lab frame has been adopted
from their paper and the speciﬁc scheme used is from the
Appendix of (Hua & Titarchuk 1995).

Since our analysis is in the non-relativistic regime, i,e.
the electron temperature, kTe and the photon energies con-
sidered are (cid:28) mec2, and that the size of the region is much
larger than the scattering length, the diﬀusion limit is still
valid. Thus, we can test the code with the analytical results
obtained in this limit including the resultant spectrum from
the Kompaneets equation (Kompaneets 1957). We test the
code in three stages. First, we compute the average energy
change for a monochromatic photon of frequency ν scatter-
ing once in a thermal medium, kTe which is expected to be
∆E = (4kTe-hν) hν
mec2 . We computed this average change in
energy of the photon for diﬀerent temperatures and found
it to match with the above expectation. Next, for a spheri-
cal geometry we consider the average number of scatterings
that a photon will undergo < Nsc > and the scattering num-
ber distribution. For such a spherical shape geometry, one
can estimate in the diﬀusion limit that < Nsc >= τ 2
2 and
the peak of scattering distribution should be around ∼0.3τ 2
(Sunyaev & Titarchuk 1980). We ﬁnd these expected results
for the Monte Carlo code, for e.g, for τ = 9.2, < Nsc >
was found to be 41.4, and the peak of the distribution was
around 25. Finally, we compare the output spectra of the
code with the analytical ones and ﬁnd a good match as
shown in Figure 1. Here, the medium temperature is ﬁxed
at kTe = 3.0 keV. The points with error-bars are from the
Monte Carlo results while the lines are the analytical solu-
tions of the Kompaneets equation (as is described in Kumar
& Misra 2014) in which the (τ 2 + τ ) term is equated with
< Nsc >. The curve marked 1 is for the case when the soft
photon temperature kTb = 0.1 keV and τ = 9.2. For these
values the spectrum around 1 keV should be of a power-law
form and that indeed is seen. The curve marked 3 is for the

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–6

Fraction of thermal Comptonized photons that impinge back

3

Table 1. List of Comptonization spectral parameters used for the
Monte Carlo code to compute ηe. The hot and cold seed photon
models are represented by two sets of spectral parameters.

Model

hot-seed

cold-seed

index Comptonization parameters
τ

kTe (keV)

kTb (keV)

Ia
Ib
IIa
IIb

3
5
3
5

1
1
0.4
0.4

9
5
9
5

named Ia and Ib while the spectra corresponding to “cold”
seed photon model are named IIa and IIb. The Monte Carlo
computations have been done for each of these four set of
spectral parameters.

3.1 Spherical/hollow shell

We start with the simplest geometry depicted in Figure 2,
where the neutron star is covered by a spherical shell which
Comptonizes photons from the surface of the neutron star.
The radius of the neutron star is ﬁxed at Rs = 10 kms while
the size of the shell L is taken as a parameter. Although
perhaps not physical, we also consider for completeness, the
possibility that the Comptonizing medium is a hollow shell
having a vacant region of size RH between it and the neutron
star (right panel of Figure)

In the Monte Carlo code, a photon is released from the
surface of the neutron star and is tracked till it either es-
capes or impinges back to the surface. One expects that the
fraction ηe will decrease with increasing L since the proba-
bility that a photon gets absorbed by the surface decreases.
This is indeed the case as shown in Figure 3 where the left
and middle panels show the computed ηe as a function of L
for the four spectral parameters tabulated in Table 1. For
comparison, the plots also show the range of η and L for the
“cold” and “hot” seed photon models inferred by the en-
ergy dependent r.m.s and time-lag of the kHz QPO (Paper
I). Although the range of η and L are rather large due to
the quality of the data, it is heartening to see that for this
geometry the computed ηe fall within this range. If better
quality data indicate a smaller ηe then perhaps such a geom-
etry can be ruled out. Naturally, a hollow geometry would
lead to lower values of ηe. The right panel of Figure 3 shows
this decrease of ηe versus the gap size RH for ﬁxed values of
L = 0.5 (solid line) and 1.0 (dashed line) kms.

3.2 Boundary layer geometry

The boundary layer is a region that connects the accretion
disk to the neutron star surface, i.e. the accreting mate-
rial makes a transition from centrifugal to pressure support
near the star (e.g. Popham & Narayan 1995; Popham & Sun-
yaev 2001). Here, we approximate the geometry as shown in
the left panel of Figure 4. We consider a rectangular torus
surrounding the spherical neutron star. The radius of the
neutron star is kept ﬁxed at Rs = 10 kms. The gap be-
tween the torus and the neutron star Rg is also ﬁxed at a
small distance of 50 m following Babkovskaia, Brandenburg
& Poutanen (2008) who estimate that the maximum dis-
tance between the star surface and the layer is about 100

Figure 1. Spectra comparison of Monte Carlo results with ana-
lytic ones. Here the points with error bars are from Monte Carlo
computations while the lines are from analytic solutions. The
three curves represent three diﬀerent regimes of Comptonization
namely power-law (1), intermediate (2) and Wien peak (3). In all
three regimes the Monte Carlo technique produces results close
to the analytical ones, validating the code being used.

case when the soft photon temperature kTb = 1.0 keV and
< Nsc > = 500. Here the emergent spectrum is a Wien peak
as expected. The curve marked 2 is for the case when the
soft photon temperature kTb = 1.0 keV and τ = 9.2 and the
Monte Carlo spectrum matched well the the analytical one.
Thus in diﬀerent regimes of Comptonization, the code gives
expected results.

3 ESTIMATING THE FRACTION ηE FOR

DIFFERENT GEOMETRIES

´
´

As shown in Paper 1, an important parameter that deter-
mines the nature of the energy dependent time lag is the
fraction of photons impinging back into the soft photon
source. Perhaps a more physical quantity is the fraction
nγb(E)E dE
nγ (E)E dE , where
in terms of photon energy, i.e. ηe =
nγ(E) represents the photons that emerge from the Comp-
tonizing medium, while nγb(E) represents those photons
which impinge back into the source. Note that this energy
weigthed fraction ηe would be close to the photon fraction
nγb(E) dE
η =
nγ (E) dE as long as the emergent spectrum is not
highly anisotropic. In other words, ηe ∼ η as long as the
spectral shape of the the photons going into the soft source
nγb(E) is not very diﬀerent from the average emergent spec-
trum nγ(E). In this section, our aim is to estimate ηe for
diﬀerent geometries using the Monte Carlo scheme.

´
´

As mentioned earlier, the spectra of neutron star
LMXBs in the 3-20 keV band can be ﬁtted by two degener-
ate models namely the “hot” and “cold” seed photon ones.
The best ﬁt spectral parameters for a given model, also vary
between diﬀerent observations. In Paper I, we used spectral
parameters for nine representative RXTE observations span-
ning a QPO frequency range of 500 - 900 Hz. In this work we
consider two sets of spectral parameters which roughly corre-
spond to the spectra when the QPO frequency is low (∼ 600
Hz and high (∼ 800 Hz). This is done for both the “hot”
and “cold” seed photon models. Table 1 lists the spectral
parameters used where the “hot” seed photon models are

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–6

1e-171e-161e-151e-141e-131e-121e-111e-10 0.01 0.1 1 10Photons density (arb. unit)Escape photons energy (in keV)1234 Kumar and Misra

Figure 3. Variation of ηe versus size for the spherical shell geometry. The left and middle panels show ηe variation with the size of the
Comptonizing medium for the ’cold’ seed photon model (Left Panel) and for the ’hot’ seed photon model (Middle Panel). The marking
on the curves (Ia,Ib,IIa,IIb) represent the spectral parameters used for the computations as listed in Table 1. The closed curves represent
the estimated range of η and size that are required to explain the soft time lag in the kHz QPO (Kumar & Misra 2016). The right panel
shows the variation of ηe with the gap size RH for the hollow shell model for the hot seed photon model spectra Ib. The solid line is for
L = 1 km while the dashed one is for L = 0.5 km.

Figure 2. A cross-sectional view of the spherical shell (left panel)
and the hollow spherical shell (right panel) geometry. The grey
region is the Comptonizing medium of width L while the white
region is the hollow/empty region of width RH . The black region
represents the neutron star with radius RS .

m. The width of the torus in the radial direction is taken
to be a parameter LR while its half-height in the vertical
direction is LH . This geometry allows for two deﬁnitions of
the optical depth τ , one along the vertical and other in the
radial direction and we do the analysis for both deﬁnitions.
For the same optical depth deﬁned in either fashion, the av-
erage number of scatterings < Nsc > is smaller by a factor of
∼ 1.5 than for the spherical shell case studied above. Hence
we use a slightly higher values of τ , 10.4 and 5.8 instead
of 9 and 5 mentioned in Table 1. We emphasise that these
changes have little eﬀect on the overall results.

We ﬁrst consider the case when the optical depth is
deﬁned along the vertical direction and we explore the vari-
ation of ηe with the vertical height LH for ﬁxed radial extent
LR and for diﬀerent spectral parameters. This is shown in
Figure 5 where the top panels are for LR = 1 km while the
bottom ones are for LR = 20 kms. The left panels are for
the ’hot’ seed photon model while the right ones are for the
’cold’ seed photon one. The contours mark the estimated
ranges of η and L from Paper I. Figure 6 is same as Figure 5
except that now the optical depth is deﬁned along the hori-
zontal direction and the top and bottom panels are for ﬁxed
values of LH = 1 and 20 kms respectively. It is clear from
both these Figures that for a wide range of sizes and spec-

Figure 4. A cross-sectional view of the boundary layer ge-
ometry (left panel) and the accretion disk/corona geometry
(Right panel). For the boundary layer geometry the Comptonizing
medium is assumed to be a torus with a rectangular cross-section
(light grey) surrounding the neutron star (black). For the accre-
tion disk corona geometry the Comptonizing medium lies above
and below the accretion disk.

tral models, the fraction ηe falls within the range required
to explain the energy dependent r.m.s and time-lags of the
kHz QPOs.

3.3 Disk-Corona geometry

We next consider a third possible geometry, i.e., of an op-
tically thick accretion disk sandwiched by an hot corona
as shown in the right panel of Figure 4. The height of the
corona is taken to be L while the disk and the corona above
is considered to span from an inner radius of of Rmin to
Rmax. For computational purposes we have introduced a
thickness of the disk of Rs = 0.2 kms but the results, as
expected, are insensitive to this value. In fact the determin-
ing parameter here is the ratio of the height of the corona
to the annular width of the disk Rmax − Rmin. Thus we ﬁx
Rmax − Rmin = 10 kms and vary L.

In Figure 7, we plot the fraction ηe versus height L for
diﬀerent spectral parameter values and as before compare
with ranges obtained in Paper I. As expected, there is only
a weak dependence of ηe on L and it has a rather large
value of ∼ 0.7. In fact for the “cold” seed photon case ηe
is marginally larger than the maximum value obtained in
Paper I. This seems to suggest that for this case at least, such
a disk-corona geometry is unfavourable. However, given the

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–6

 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 10 100ηe L in kmIIbIIa 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 10 100ηe L in kmIaIb 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 10ηe RH in km  ORSL  RSOLRH  LRLHRSORG  LRSRmax - RminFraction of thermal Comptonized photons that impinge back

5

Figure 7. ηe as a function of the coronal width L for the accretion
disk-corona geometry. Here the extent of the disk Rmax−Rmin =
10 kms. The left and right panel are for the hot and cold seed pho-
ton models. The solid and dashed lines are for two corresponding
spectral parameters. The closed curves show the allowed range of
η and size obtained by (Kumar & Misra 2016)

mary motivation was that to explain the observed soft lags
in KHz QPOs, one needed to invoke a large value η in the
range of 0.2-0.6 and it was important to ﬁnd out if this range
can be achieved for any reasonable accretion geometry.

We consider three kinds of geometries for the Comp-
tonizing medium which are (i) a spherical shell around the
neutron star, (ii) a boundary layer system where the medium
is taken to be a rectangular torus around the star and (iii) a
corona sandwiching a thin accretion disk. We consider diﬀer-
ent sizes for the medium and a range of spectra parameters.
In particular we consider two extreme cases of spectral pa-
rameters for the two degenerate spectral models which are
called the hot and cold seed photon models.

Our basic result is that for a wide range of reasonable
sizes and spectral parameters, the values of ηe computed by
the Monte Carlo method lie within 0.2 to 0.8 and hence are
compatible with the values used by Kumar & Misra (2016)
to explain the soft time lags of the kHz QPOs. Since the
range of η and size inferred from ﬁtting the time-lags are
rather broad, we cannot concretely rule out any of the three
geometries considered. However, it seems that the bound-
ary layer geometry can have η values more in line with what
is required and the disk-corona geometry produces η values
which are marginally larger. Our results show that it is pos-
sible to constrain the geometry of the system if high quality
data for energy dependent time-lags are available. We look
forward to data from the recently launched satellite AS-
TROSAT1(Agrawal 2006; Singh et al. 2014), which might
provide such high quality data. Perhaps it would then be
warranted to consider other complexities such as the seed
photons for the boundary layer case may be produced in
the accretion disk rather than the neutron star surface or
that the corona on top of the accretion disk maybe in the
form of inhomogeneous clumps rather than being a uniform
medium. Also, not all the photons that impinge back into
the source, will be absorbed and one needs to solve the radia-
tive transfer equations self consistently to ﬁnd the fraction
reﬂected. This reﬂected emission will have light travel time
delays which may signiﬁcantly eﬀect the time-lags between
diﬀerent energy bands.

Finally, it is interesting to note that for the geometries
considered here a signiﬁcant fraction of the photons impinge

1 http://astrosat.iucaa.in

Figure 5. ηe as a variation of size for the Boundary layer geome-
try when the optical depth is deﬁned along the vertical direction.
The top and bottom two panels are for the case when the hori-
zontal width is taken to be LR = 1 and 20 kms respectively. The
left and right panels are for the hot and cold seed photon mod-
els. The solid and dashed lines are for two corresponding spectral
parameters. The closed curves show the allowed range of η and
size obtained by (Kumar & Misra 2016).

Figure 6. ηe as a variation of size for the Boundary layer geom-
etry when the optical depth is deﬁned along the radial direction.
The top and bottom two panels are for the case when the vertical
height is taken to be LH = 1 and 20 kms respectively. The left
and right panels are for the hot and cold seed photon models.
The solid and dashed lines are for two corresponding spectral pa-
rameters. The closed curves show the allowed range of η and size
obtained by (Kumar & Misra 2016).

large uncertainties it is diﬃcult to make concrete statements.
Nevertheless, our results show that for such a geometry the
value of ηe is expected to be large, more or less independent
of the thickness of the corona.

4 SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

Using a Monte Carlo scheme, we estimate the fraction of
Comptonized photons that impinge back into the seed pho-
ton source η for diﬀerent geometries and spectral parameters
relevant to neutron star low mass X-ray binaries. The pri-

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–6

 0.2 0.4 0.6ηe0.20.40.6  1 10110LH (km) 0.2 0.4 0.6ηe0.20.40.6  1 10110LR (km) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 10ηe L in kmIaIb 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 10ηe L in kmIIaIIb6 Kumar and Misra

back into soft photon source. This eﬀect needs to be taken
into account in any detailed study of these X-ray binaries.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

NK thanks CSIR/UGC for providing support for this work.

References

Agrawal P.C., 2006, Advances in Space Research, 38, 2989
Altamirano, D., van der Klis, M., Mendez, M., et al., 2008,

ApJ, 685, 436

Babkovskaia, N., Brandenburg A., Poutanen J., 2008, MN-

RAS, 386, 1038

Barret, D., 2001, Adv. Space Res., 28, 307
Barret, D., 2013, ApJ, 770, 9
Belloni, T., Mendez, M., Homan, J., 2007, MNRAS, 376 ,

1133

Cocchi M., Farinelli R., Paizis A., 2011, A&A, 529, A155
Di Salvo, T., Stella, L., 2002, in Proc. of the XXII Moriond
Astrophysics Meeting, The Gamma-Ray Universe, ed. A.
Goldwurm, D. Neumann, & J. Tran Thanh Van, 67;
arXiv:astro-ph/0207219v1

Hua, X.-M., Titarchuk, L., 1995, 449, 188
Kompaneets, A. S., 1957, Soviet Phys. JETP, 4, 730
Kumar, N., Misra, R., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 2818
Kumar, N., Misra, R., 2016, to be submitted in MNRAS

(Paper I); arXiv:1602.08841v1

Lee, H.C., Miller, G.S., 1998, MNRAS, 299, 479
Lee, H.C., Misra, R., Taam, R.E., 2001, ApJ, 549, L229
Lin, D., Remillard, R.A., Homan, J., 2007, ApJ, 667 , 1073
Mendez, M., van der Klis, M., Ford, E.C., et al., 1999, ApJ,

511, L49

Misra, R., Shanthi, K., 2004, MNRAS, 354, 945
Mitsuda K., et al., 1984, PASJ, 36, 741
Popham, R., Narayan, R., 1995, Ap.J., 442, 337
Popham, R., Sunyaev R., 2001, Ap.J., 547, 355
Pozdnyakov, L.A., Sobol, I.M., Sunyaev, R.A., 1983, Ap.

Space Phys. Rev., 2, 189

Remillard, R.A., and McClintock, J.E., 2006, ARA&A, 44,

49

Sazonov, S.Y., and Sunyaev, R.A., 2000, A&A, 354, L53
Singh K. P., et al., 2014, in Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 9144,
1

Straaten, S., van der Klis, M., Mendez M., 2003, ApJ, 596,

1155

Sunyaev, R.A., Titarchuk, L., 1980, A&A, 86, 121
Tanaka, Y., Shibazaki N., 1996, ARA&A, 34, 607
van der Klis, M. 2000, ARA&A, 38, 717
van der Klis, M., 2006, Compact Stellar X-ray Sources,
Chept. 2, eds. Lewin, W.H.G., and van der Klis, M. (Cam-
bridge Astrophysics Series 39)

White N. E., et al., 1986, MNRAS, 218, 129
Zdziarski, A.A., and Pjanka, P. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 2950

c(cid:13) 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–6

