Assessing the Navigational Effects of Click Biases

and Link Insertion on the Web

Florian Geigl

KTI, Graz University of

Technology

ﬂorian.geigl@tugraz.at

Kristina Lerman

ISI, University of Southern

California

lerman@isi.edu

Simon Walk

IICM, Graz University of

Technology

simon.walk@tugraz.at

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
0
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Markus Strohmaier

University of Koblenz-Landau
markus.strohmaier@gesis.org

and GESIS

Denis Helic

KTI, Graz University of

Technology

dhelic@tugraz.at

ABSTRACT
Websites have an inherent interest in steering user naviga-
tion in order to, for example, increase sales of speciﬁc prod-
ucts or categories, or to guide users towards speciﬁc infor-
mation. In general, website administrators can use the fol-
lowing two strategies to inﬂuence their visitors’ navigation
behavior. First, they can introduce click biases to reinforce
speciﬁc links on their website by changing their visual ap-
pearance, for example, by locating them on the top of the
page. Second, they can utilize link insertion to generate new
paths for users to navigate over. In this paper, we present a
novel approach for measuring the potential eﬀects of these
two strategies on user navigation. Our results suggest that,
depending on the pages for which we want to increase user
visits, optimal link modiﬁcation strategies vary. Moreover,
simple topological measures can be used as proxies for as-
sessing the impact of the intended changes on the navigation
of users, even before these changes are implemented.

Keywords
Click Biases, Link Insertion, Random Surfer, Stationary Dis-
tribution

1.

INTRODUCTION

Millions of people use the Web on a daily basis to buy
products in online shops, perform ﬁnancial transactions via
online banking, or simply browse information systems, me-
dia libraries or online encyclopedias, such as IMDb, Netﬂix
or Wikipedia. To ﬁnd and access relevant information on
the Web, people either search, navigate, or combine these
two activities. A recent study [10] found that 35% of all
visits to a website can be attributed to teleports, which are
the direct result of clicks on search-engine results, navigation
through manually typed URLs, or clicks on browser book-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
- -
c(cid:13) 2016 ACM. ISBN -. . . $15.00
DOI: -

marks. The remaining 65% of the clicks can be attributed
to the task of navigating a webpage. In this paper, we di-
rect our attention towards these 65% of actions and tackle
the question what potential eﬀects we can expect if we inﬂu-
ence the link selection process of website visitors by simple
link modiﬁcations. In particular, we are interested in the ef-
fects of diﬀerent link modiﬁcation strategies on (stochastic)
models of Web navigation.
Problem. By inserting new links between webpages of a
website, we alter the link structure. This has the potential
to change user browsing behavior, since new links create
new paths for users to explore the website. Alternatively,
without changing the link structure of the website, we might
be able to inﬂuence the link selection process of visitors.
Studies have shown that the decisions of users for where
to navigate next can be inﬂuenced by the layout and the
position of the links on a webpage.
In particular, due to
position bias [19] users are more likely to select links higher
up on webpages [5, 6, 23]. As a result, inducing click biases,
such as repositioning links on a webpage, highlighting the
links, or even making them visually more appealing, can
aﬀect the users’ decision of where to click next on a website,
similar to the way that adding new links aﬀects browsing.

In this paper we are particularly interested in investigat-
ing and comparing the potential consequences of inserting
new links and modifying already existing links on the nav-
igational behavior of users. These newly obtained insights
are of a signiﬁcant practical relevance for website owners,
as they can be used, for example, by owners of media li-
braries to increase visits of speciﬁc media ﬁles in order to
reduce the number of diﬀerent ﬁles that need to be cached
on fast storage devices. Another example includes online
encyclopedias, where operators may want to guide users to-
wards articles of a speciﬁc category over some period of time
(e.g., the birthday of an inventor). In some of these cases,
link insertion might be more time-consuming than simply
changing the layout of the website to increase visibility of
speciﬁc links and vice versa. Theoretically, we would like
to analyze and compare the eﬀects of such link modiﬁcation
endeavors. Practically, new tools are needed to assist web-
site operators in deciding which of the two strategies they
should deploy to achieve the desired eﬀects.
Methods. In this paper we study the impact of link mod-
iﬁcations on the random surfer, which we apply as a proxy

for real user behavior. In the past, a user’s decision to click
on a link on a webpage was successfully modeled using the
random surfer [4, 15, 29]. In this model, a user selects one
of the links on a webpage uniformly at random and nav-
igates to the page to which the link points. Apart from
the huge success of the Google search engine, whose ranking
algorithm is based on the random surfer model, empirical
studies have shown that this model provides a very precise
approximation of real browsing behavior in many situations
and for a variety of applications [4, 9]. An important prop-
erty of a random surfer is its stationary distribution, which
is the probability distribution of ﬁnding a random surfer at
a speciﬁc webpage in the limit of large number of steps.

In particular, we investigate how the random surfer’s sta-
tionary distribution of a subset of pages (i.e., target pages) of
a given website changes as a consequence of (i) modifying al-
ready existing links towards them, (ii) introducing new links
towards them, or by (iii) combining these two approaches.
To that end, we introduce a click bias, and a link insertion
strategy. We model the eﬀects of click biases on the intrinsic
attractiveness of a link to the user by increasing the weight
of that link.
In practice, we may introduce such click bi-
ases, for example, by locating the corresponding link on the
top of a page. With link insertion, we simply introduce new
links between webpages of a website, for example, by linking
towards a given target page from the starting page.

We introduce quantitative measures that allow us to ad-

dress the following research questions:
Navigational Boost. How stable is the stationary distribu-
tion with respect to the proposed modiﬁcation strategies,
and what are the limits of stationary distributions that can
be achieved for a given set of webpages? Is it (theoretically)
possible to achieve a given stationary probability distribu-
tion for an arbitrary subset of webpages of a website? What
is the connection between simple topological measures of the
website network and stationary probability?
Inﬂuence Potential. What is the relative gain of the station-
ary probabilities compared to their unmodiﬁed counterparts.
This provides us with an answer to the “guidance” potential
of a set of webpages, deﬁning to what extent it is possible
to increase the relative stationary probabilities as compared
to the initial unmodiﬁed values.
Combinations. Finally, we are interested how combinations
of the two proposed link modiﬁcation strategies perform in
terms of increased stationary probabilities of selected sub-
pages. In particular, we investigate the performance of cer-
tain combinations across several diﬀerent networks and/or
selected subpages.
Contributions & Findings. We ﬁnd that intuitions about
how either modiﬁcation strategy aﬀects navigation are not
always correct. Further, our experiments show that the size
of a set of targeted subpages is not always a good predictor
for the observed eﬀects. Rather, other topological features
often better reﬂect the consequences of a modiﬁcation. Prac-
tically, we provide an open source framework1 for website
administrators to estimate the eﬀects of link modiﬁcations
on their website.

2. RELATED WORK

The random surfer model has received much attention
from the research community [21, 30]. While the model is

1https://github.com/ﬂoriangeigl/RandomSurfers

very simple, it became well-established over the last years. It
was applied to a variety of problems from graph generators
over graph analysis to modeling user navigation. Further-
more, the model has been applied to calculate structural
node properties in large networks. HITS [17] and PageR-
ank [4, 25] rank network nodes according to their values in
the stationary distribution of the random surfer model. Es-
pecially for the later there exists a detailed analysis rang-
ing from the eﬃciency of its calculation towards its robust-
ness [3,18]. Bianchini et al. [3] provided an in-depth analysis
of how to tweak the cumulative PageRank of a community of
websites. They found that splitting up the content of pages
onto more highly interlink pages increases the community’s
cumulative PageRank—since the community is larger it con-
sists of more pages which are able to trap the random surfer
for a longer period of time. Moreover, they suggest to avoid
dangling webpages (i.e., pages without links to other pages).
In this paper we are also interested in the sum of the ran-
dom surfers visit probabilities in a community, however we
do not use (i) teleportation as in the PageRank model, and
(ii) do not modify the network in its size (i.e., number of
pages). On the contrary we modify the transition probabil-
ities of certain links and insert new links into the network.
Moreover, since all our datasets are strongly connected, we
do not face the problem of unwanted high visit probabilities
of usually unimportant pages (i.e., dangling nodes) [3].

A random surfer can be steered towards speciﬁc nodes in
the network by increasing the probability of traversing links
towards those nodes. This can be accomplished by biasing
random surfer’s link selection strategy so that it is not uni-
formly random anymore, but biased towards speciﬁc nodes.
For instance, in the ﬁeld of information retrieval Richard-
son et al. [27] successfully applied biased random surfers
to increase the quality of search results compared to those
achieved using a simple PageRank. At the same time Haveli-
wala [13, 14] biased PageRank towards topics retrieved from
a search query to rank the query results. Utilizing this tech-
nique the results where more accurate than those produced
using a single, generic PageRank. Moreover, Gyongyi et
al. [12] successfully used trust as bias to detect and ﬁlter
out spam pages of search results. However, later Al-Saﬀar
and Heileman [1] showed that biased PageRank algorithms
generate a considerable overlap in top results with a simple
PageRank. Concerning this problem their main suggestion
was to use external biases which do not rely onto the un-
derlying link structure of the network.
In our paper we
randomly decide towards which nodes we bias the random
surfer. This allows us to explore the borders of changes in
stationary distributions caused by a bias.

Later Helic et al. [15] compared click trails characteristics
of stochastically biased random surfers with those of hu-
mans. Their conclusion was, that biased random surfers can
serve as valid models of human navigation. Further, Geigl
et al. [9] validated this by showing that the result vector
of PageRank and clickdata biased PageRank have a strong
correlation in an online encyclopedia. This is especially in-
teresting, since it creates the connection of our simulation
to real human navigation on the web. Additionally, Lerman
and Hogg [19] already showed that it is possible to bias the
link selection of users. In particular, they came to the con-
clusion that users are subject to a position bias, making the
selection of links higher up on webpages up to a factor of
3.5 more likely [5, 19, 23]. Hence, it is of practical relevance

to investigate also the eﬀects of biases in the link selection
process onto the stationary distribution.

Concerning link insertion there already exists work in lit-
erature which makes use of statistical methods to suggest
new links in network structures to, for instance, increase the
performance of chip architectures [24].
In particular, the
authors use a standard mesh and insert long-range links,
converting the network into a small-world network. This
reduced packet latency results in a major improvement in
throughput. Another ﬁeld of research where link insertion
is of interest are recommender systems for social friendship
networks [2, 20, 22, 28]. For example, Xie et al. [31] charac-
terized interests of users in two dimensions (i.e., context and
content) and exploited this information to eﬃciently recom-
mend potential new friends in an online social network. In
this paper we focus on the eﬀects of inserted links onto the
typical whereabouts of the random surfer. In particular, we
are interested in inserting links into the network such that
the random surfer more frequently visits a predeﬁned subset
of pages of a website (i.e., target pages).

3. METHODOLOGY

We base our methodology on the calculations of the sta-
tionary distribution of a random surfer on the original and
manipulated networks. The networks consist of nodes, which
represent webpages and directed links between nodes, which
represent hyperlinks between webpages. We ﬁrst calculate
the transition matrix and the stationary distribution for the
original network, which will be used as a baseline for com-
paring the eﬀects of link modiﬁcations. Second, we increase
the statistical weight of a random surfer visiting a set of pre-
deﬁned nodes (i.e., target pages or target nodes). We do that
either by increasing the link weights towards selected nodes
(click bias) or by adding new links pointing towards those
nodes (link insertion). Third, we generate the correspond-
ing transition matrix for the modiﬁed network. Fourth, we
calculate the stationary distribution of the new transition
matrices. Finally, we compare the modiﬁed stationary dis-
tribution with the original stationary distribution to gain
insights into the eﬀects of the diﬀerent link modiﬁcations.
Figure 1 illustrates these steps on a toy example.
3.1 Preliminaries

In what follows we formalize our approach algebraically.
We represent a website as a directed network with a weighted
adjacency matrix W ∈ Rn×n, where n is the number of
webpages in the website under investigation. We deﬁne the
element Wij of the weighted adjacency matrix W as the sum
of edge weights of all links pointing from node j to node i.
For example, Wij = 1 if there is a single link from page j to
page i with weight 1, and Wij = 3 if there are three links
pointing from page j to page i each with weight 1.

For our analysis we introduce target nodes as the nodes
whose stationary probability we want to increase. We use
vector t ∈ Rn to specify them:

(cid:40)

ti =

1 if i is a target node
0 otherwise.

We further deﬁne φ as a fraction of target nodes with respect
to the total number of nodes n:

(1)

(2)

(cid:80)

i ti
n

φ =

Hence, φ = 0.1 means that 10% of nodes from the network
are target nodes.
3.2 Stationary Distribution

The stationary distribution represents the probability to
ﬁnd the random surfer on any node in the limit of large num-
ber of steps. To compute the stationary distribution we ﬁrst
need to construct a diagonal out-degree matrix D, with the
weighted node out-degrees on its diagonal. Using diag(v)
to denote diagonal matrices with elements of a vector v on
their diagonal we deﬁne D as:

(cid:32) n(cid:88)

(cid:33)

D = diag

Wij

.

(3)

i=1

Using D matrix we can calculate the transition matrix P ,
which is a left stochastic matrix of W as P = W D−1. The
stationary distribution π now satisﬁes the (right) eigenvalue
equation for the matrix P : π = P π.
3.3 Click Bias

To introduce click biases that inﬂuence the link selection
strategy of the random surfer, we reweigh the links pointing
towards target nodes by multiplying their weight by a con-
stant scalar b, which we call bias strength. For example, a
bias strength of b = 2 doubles the weight of all links towards
target nodes. The ﬁnal probability of the random surfer to
traverse a link is then directly proportional to its weight.
Algebraically, we induce biases with a diagonal bias ma-
trix B which we deﬁne as B = I + (b − 1) · diag(t). The
adjacency matrix of a biased network is W (cid:48) = BW . To
compute the stationary distribution of the biased network,
we ﬁrst calculate the new transition matrix P (cid:48) = W (cid:48)D(cid:48)−1
and then its stationary distribution π(cid:48).

Please note that from the technical perspective, inducing
a bias is the same as inserting parallel links towards target
nodes—it increases the value of speciﬁc elements (i.e., those
representing links towards target nodes) in the adjacency
matrix. The total weight of newly added parallel links l(b)
due to an induced bias b is given by:

l(b) =

(4)

(cid:88)
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)

(cid:48)
ij

W

ij

# links in W (cid:48)

− (cid:88)
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)

Wij

ij

# links in W

To allow for a fair comparison between the click bias and
the link insertion strategy we insert exactly l(b) new links
with weight 1 in the latter case.
3.4 Link Insertion

The second link modiﬁcation strategy consists of insert-
ing new links towards the target nodes from a given set
of source nodes. This strategy represents the case where
a website administrator inserts links towards target nodes
from important subpages of their website. We deﬁne the
importance of a webpage as its stationary probability in the
original network.

To insert a given number l(b) of new links we proceed
as follows. We start by sorting nodes by their stationary
probability in a descending order. In the next step we insert
new links from the top l(b)/(n· φ) nodes to all target nodes.
Here n · φ is the number of target nodes and we always
ceil the calculated number of source nodes to ensure that
there are enough pairs of nodes. If one of the target nodes

W =

2 0 0 0

1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1

0
0
0

 W (cid:48) =

0 0 1 1
0 1 0 0
1 0 1 0

0 1 0 0
0 2 0 0
0 1 0 1

 P =
 P (cid:48) =
 P (cid:48) =

1 1
0 0
1 0

0
0
1

0
1
0

0 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 1

1
0
0

π =

0.36
0.18
0.27

0.0 0.0 0.5 1.0
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0
1.0 0.0 0.5 0.0

0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0

0.0 0.67 0.0 0.0
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.5

0.0
0.5 1.0
0.0 0.33 0.0 0.0
0.5 0.0
1.0

0.0 0.0 0.5 0.5
0.0
0.0 0.5 0.0
1.0 0.0 0.5
0.0

0.18

0.24
 π(cid:48) =

0.22
 π(cid:48) =


0.35
0.12
0.29

0.33
0.17
0.28

0.0

0.0

W (cid:48) =

l
a
n
i
g
i
r
O

s
a
i
B
k
c
i
l

C

n
o
i
t
r
e
s
n
I

k
n
L

i

B =

only one node: node 1 (t =(cid:0)1 0 0 0(cid:1)(cid:124)

Figure 1: Modeling Click Bias and Link Insertion - Illustrative Example. We intend to use diﬀerent link modiﬁcation
strategies to steer the random surfer towards the red colored node 1 more often. Hence, our target nodes vector consists of
). In each row we visualize the corresponding network of the website, where nodes
represent webpages and links represent hyperlinks between the webpages. Further, for each of them we show how we calculate
its stationary distribution. This involves (from left to right) the weighted adjacency matrix W (unmodiﬁed network) or W (cid:48)
(modiﬁed networks), the corresponding transition matrix P (unmodiﬁed network) or P (cid:48) (modiﬁed networks) and ﬁnally the
corresponding stationary distribution π (unmodiﬁed network) or π(cid:48) (modiﬁed networks). The blue links in the graphs and
the blue matrix elements in bold show the link modiﬁcations and their eﬀects on the adjacency and the transition matrix.
The red vector elements show the eﬀects of the modiﬁcations on the stationary probability (energy) of node 1. Top row.
Here we depict the original and unmodiﬁed network. Middle row. We modify the network with a click bias. We double
the statistical weights of links towards target nodes (bias strength b = 2). To calculate the modiﬁed adjacency matrix we
ﬁrst construct the diagonal bias matrix B and then compute W (cid:48) = BW . We see an increase in energy of node 1 from 0.18
in the unmodiﬁed network to 0.24. Bottom row. We insert a new link from node 4 to 1 (i.e., blue link in graph and blue
element in W (cid:48)) into the original network. Due to the link insertion the energy of node 1 increases from 0.18 in the unmodiﬁed
network to 0.22 in the modiﬁed network. Thus, in this toy example the eﬀects of the click bias are stronger than those of link
insertion. Additionally, we see that also elements in the out-component of node 1 (i.e., node 4) proﬁt of an increased energy
of node 1 since a signiﬁcant amount of 1’s increased energy ﬂows into node 4.

is itself designated as a source node we do not insert self-
loops—from the practical point of view, it does not make
sense to link a webpage to itself.
In the rare case where
we have connected all possible combinations of source and
target nodes but did not reach the required number of links,
we simply reiterate the list of the source nodes resulting
in parallel links between nodes. Please note that we insert
parallel links if a link between a source and a target node
has already existed in the original network. However, this
happens extremely rarely because all of our networks are
sparse. In fact, in all our experiments the fraction of inserted
parallel links was on average less than 1%.
3.5 Combinations

Finally, we can combine the two link modiﬁcation strate-
gies and study the eﬀects of such combinations on the sta-
tionary distribution and investigate if an optimal combina-
tion of strategies exists, which outperforms the individual
approaches. From the practical point of view this means
that for optimally steering website users, we combine both,
the click bias and link insertion mechanisms.

To create a combined link modiﬁcation method we ﬁrst

introduce α ∈ [0, 1], which we call the mixing factor. The
mixing factor determines how many of the l(b) links are in-
serted by the click bias. Then, 1− α deﬁnes how many links
are inserted by the link insertion strategy:

l(b) = α · l(b)

+ (1 − α) · l(b)

(5)

# biased links

# inserted links

(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)

With a combined strategy we cannot bias all links towards
target nodes—again, we need to select a subset of links to-
wards target nodes. In analogy to the link insertion method
we again preferably select links between nodes having higher
stationary probability in the unmodiﬁed network. Thus, we
ﬁrst compute the probability distribution over the eligible
ij Lij = 1. We deﬁne

links in the form of matrix L, where(cid:80)

matrix L as:

L = diag(π) · diag(t) · W · diag(π).

(6)

The probability of selecting a link is directly proportional to
the product of the unmodiﬁed stationary probability of its
source and target node. Note that due to the multiplicative
factor diag(t) · W only links towards target nodes have a

123412341234non-zero probability. With L in place we sample α·l(b) links
without replacement and multiply their value in W (cid:48) by b to
induce the click bias. To insert the remaining (1 − α) · l(b)
links we adopt the link insertion strategy on the matrix W (cid:48)
as described previously.
3.6 Measuring the Effects

To measure the eﬀects of link modiﬁcation strategies we
quantify how the stationary probabilities of given target
nodes change as a function of the modiﬁcation. In the re-
mainder of this paper we will refer to a node’s stationary
probability using the, in the literature established, term en-
ergy [3]. To that end, we calculate the energy of target nodes
(π(cid:48)
t), which is the sum of the modiﬁed stationary probabili-
ties of target nodes, as following:
i · ti ,
(cid:48)
π

(cid:88)

(7)

(cid:48)
t =

π

i

where π(cid:48) is the stationary distribution of the modiﬁed ad-
jacency matrix.

We further measure the inﬂuence potential, which is the
relative increase in the energy of target nodes due to the
modiﬁcation, as a factor τ :

τ =

π(cid:48)
t
πt

,

(8)

network (i.e., πt =(cid:80)

i πi · ti).

where πt is the energy of target nodes of the unmodiﬁed

4. DATASETS

For our experiments we use three datasets: an online ency-
lopedia Wikipedia for Schools2 (W4S ) and two online media
libraries ORF TVthek3 (ORF ) and Das Erste Mediathek4
(DEM ).

We collected the data by crawling the corresponding web-
sites. Starting from the main page of a website we recur-
sively crawled all subpages by following all outgoing links
from a given webpage. Note that we did not follow external
links, meaning that we skipped links to pages not belonging
to a given website. Further, we did not follow links gener-
ated via Flash, AJAX or any other client-rendered content.
After collecting the data, we removed self-loops, which
are links from a webpage to itself, and special links such as
“log-in”, “write a review”, and all other links that require a
session-id. In the next step, we represented each dataset as
a directed network—webpages are represented as nodes con-
nected by directed links. For calculating the stationary dis-
tribution, we extracted the largest strongly connected com-
ponent (SCC) of each network, so that in the ﬁnal network
it is possible to navigate from any given node to any other
node in the network. These ﬁnal networks have 4, 051 nodes
and 111, 795 links (W4S ), 9, 799 nodes and 301, 844 links
(ORF ), and 70, 063 nodes and 3, 448, 513 links (DEM ).

5. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

To investigate the eﬀects of manipulating links we ﬁrst
generate sets of target nodes. For this purpose we draw the
desired number of nodes uniformly at random from the net-
work without replacement, creating a synthetic set of nodes
2http://http://schools-wikipedia.org/
3http://tvthek.orf.at/
4http://mediathek.daserste.de/

of a speciﬁed size. Note that those sets can consist of web-
pages that are not linked to each other. We conduct all
of our experiments with the same initially generated target
nodes to reduce the inﬂuence of the random node selection
process. For making the number of webpages selected as
target nodes comparable between datasets we refer to the
size of target nodes as φ, which is the fraction of target
nodes. To generate target nodes we use several values for φ
which range from 0.01 to 0.2. For each dataset and each φ
we generate 100 diﬀerent synthetic sets of nodes (i.e., target
nodes).
Limiting (High) Bias Behavior. In our ﬁrst experiment
we are interested in analyzing the impact of an increasing
bias strength on the energy of target nodes using either a
click bias on already existing links or inserting new links in
an informed way. We use bias strengths reaching from b = 2
to b = 200 to investigate their eﬀects. Note that for the link
insertion strategy the number of inserted links is deﬁned by
the bias strength b using Equation 4. This ensures a fair
comparison between the two methods.
Realistic (Lower) Bias Strengths. In this experiment
we investigate practically relevant [16,19] values for the bias
strength b. In particular, we iterate over the range 2 to 15
as bias strengths. With this experiment we gain insights
into the eﬀects of the proposed modiﬁcations, which can
be implemented in websites. After the modiﬁcation of the
adjacency matrix we measure the energy of target nodes π(cid:48)
t.
This allows us to investigate the eﬃciency of both methods
for a given bias strength.
Relative Increase in Stationary Probability. With the
previous experiments we analyze changes in the energy of
target nodes in absolute terms. For instance, we may learn
that for a given set of target nodes we may achieve an energy
of π(cid:48)
t = 0.5. However, we do not know what the relative
increase in their energy is. For example, the set of target
nodes may have had πt = 0.49 in the unmodiﬁed network
rendering our eﬀorts futile in relative terms. Thus, in this
experiment we use τ to measure the inﬂuence potential. A
higher value for τ means a larger relative increase in the
energy of target nodes. Again, we compare the results for a
given bias strength between our two methods.
Combination of Strategies. Finally, we are interested
in investigating if and to what extent the energy of target
nodes changes if we combine click biases and link insertion.
We vary the mixture factor α from 0 to 1 in increments of 0.1
and measure the energy of target nodes π(cid:48)
t of the modiﬁed
networks.

6. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
6.1 Saturation

Figure 2 depicts the eﬀects of link modiﬁcations in our
datasets with increasing values of bias strength b and varying
fractions of target nodes φ (0.01, 0.1 and 0.2).
In the case of click bias we observe the following situation.
For small values of b the energy of target nodes π(cid:48)
t increases
very quickly (navigational boost phase, which we analyze in
more detail in Section 6.2)—this energy saturates for larger
values of b (i.e., b > 35). This holds for larger φ values (0.1
and 0.2), whereas for a smaller φ, for example φ = 0.01,
the initial growth as well as the saturation are signiﬁcantly
slower and lower respectively. Further, for higher φ (0.1 and
0.2) π(cid:48)
t saturates at an almost identical and very high level

(a) W4S

(b) ORF

(c) DEM

Figure 3: Inﬂuence of Target Nodes Degree Ratio onto the Saturation of their Energy. The plots depict the due to
link insertion achieved energy of target nodes pi(cid:48)
t as the function of their degree ratio. Each line depicts the results for a given
φ. For increased readability we group data points into six equally sized bins according to their degree ratio (x-axes). Values
on the y-axes represent the averages of the data points falling into the corresponding bin. Top row. In the top row we show
the distribution of the target nodes degree ratios (in bins; x-axes)—the y-axes denote the number of data points (N) falling
into each bin. Middle row. Here, we depict the results for medium and large fractions of target nodes. Bottom row. For
readability we depict small fractions of target nodes separately. Over all datasets and all φ we consistently observe a negative
correlation between degree ratio and energy π(cid:48)
t. This means that with an increasing ratio—an increasing out-degree and a
decreasing in-degree—the drain of energy increases and this leads to the saturation of the energy of target nodes.
node 1 (cf. original π4 = 0.27 and modiﬁed π(cid:48)
4 = 0.29).
Thus, although π(cid:48)
1 increases with increasing bias strength,
node 1 would never reach energy values close to 1.0 because
node 4 attracts a certain amount energy to itself.

(a) Click Bias

(b) Link Inseration

Figure 2: Saturation. The plots depict the connection
between bias strength (x-axis) and the increased energy of
target nodes due to an induced click bias (left) or link in-
sertion (right). Each marker type and color refers to one
dataset. Dashed, solid and dotted line styles refer to frac-
tion of target nodes φ 0.01, 0.1 and 0.2 respectively. We can
observe that both link modiﬁcation strategies reach a cer-
tain level of saturation—meaning that further increases in
bias strength do not result in an increase in energy of target
nodes. Therefore, for both strategies we identify two phases:
a (i) navigational boost phase in which we observe a rapid
increase of the stationary probability (blueish region with
small values of the bias strength), and a (ii) saturation phase
(reddish region with larger values of the bias strength).

(>0.8)—if the click bias is strong enough we can increase the
energy of any fraction of target nodes larger than φ > 0.1.

An interesting question in this respect is the height of the
energy saturation level. Theoretically, this level is close to
1.0 but as Figure 2 shows, in empirical networks this level
can not be fully reached. Essentially, due to the directed na-
ture of the network, the target nodes out-component (i.e.,
the nodes with incoming links from target nodes) will al-
ways act as a drain that will take some energy from the
target nodes. That amount depends on the size of the out-
component as well as its connectivity with other parts of the
network—in particular the existence of back-links towards
target nodes. This situation is depicted in our toy example
Figure 1 in the middle row. Node 4, which has an incoming
link from node 1, proﬁts from an induced click bias towards

In the case of the link insertion strategy the results are
more diverse (cf. Figure 2b). For DEM dataset we observe
a quick saturation for all values of φ. Diﬀerently from the
click bias the saturation level is signiﬁcantly lower for this
dataset (i.e., 0.6). For the ORF dataset we do not observe
saturation but a monotonous increase in the energy of target
nodes for increasing values of φ. Finally, for the W4S dataset
and larger φ (0.1 and 0.2) we can observe saturation at levels
higher than 0.9.

As previously, the size of the out-component of the target
nodes, combined with the size of their in-component (i.e.,
the source nodes which point towards target nodes), as well
as the ratio of these two quantities provide a possible ex-
planation for this behavior. Basically, we can calculate the
average number of newly inserted links as l(b) = d · n · φ · b,
where d is the average degree (i.e., in a directed network
average degree d corresponds to both the average in-degree
as well as average out-degree) and n, φ, b are as before.
Thus, in the networks with a higher average degree we in-
sert more new links. For smaller values of bias strength
(blueish region in Figure 2b) these new links lead to a nav-
igational boost, resulting in a quick increase in the energy
π(cid:48)
t of target nodes. The navigational boost is higher in net-
works with a higher average degree—we observe the highest
increase in π(cid:48)
t in DEM with d = 49.22, the second highest in
ORF with d = 30.8, and the lowest in W4S with d = 27.6.
As mentioned before, in Section 6.2 we analyze this navi-
gational boost in more detail. However, for larger values of
bias strength (reddish region in Figure 2b) the eﬀects of the
drain due to the larger size of the out-component become
visible—the networks with a higher increase for smaller bias
strengths lose their energy now more quickly. Thus, the or-
dering of the saturation levels for higher bias strengths is
reversed to the navigational boost in energy for lower bias
strengths, resulting in W4S to now have the highest satura-
tion level, followed by ORF and then by DEM.

To conﬁrm our intuition about the saturation for the link

fractionoftargetnodes(φ)0.010.10.23060N0.450.600.750.90energy (π0t)0.81.21.62.0degree ratio (drt)0.300.450.600.753060N0.450.600.750.90energy (π0t)0.61.21.82.4degree ratio (drt)0.300.450.600.753060N0.450.600.750.90energy (π0t)36912degree ratio (drt)0.300.450.600.75datasetfractionoftargetnodes(φ)W4S0.01ORF0.1DEM0.2050100150200bias strength (b)0.00.20.40.60.81.0energy (π0t)050100150200bias strength (b)0.00.20.40.60.81.0energy (π0t)−

t =(cid:80)
t = (cid:80)

insertion strategy we performed the following analysis. First,
we calculated some structural properties for the target nodes.
In particular, based on the insights of Ding et al. [7,8], we de-
ﬁne the in-degree of target nodes as the sum of the weights of
ij ( diag(t) · W )ij.
links pointing towards target nodes d
The out-degree of target nodes is the sum of the weights of
ij (W · diag(t))ij.
outgoing links of target nodes d+
Finally, the degree ratio of target nodes is a ratio between the
−
previous two measurements (i.e., dr
t ). Although,
it has been shown that properties, such as the simple count
of in-links of a node, are bad approximations for PageRank
on a large scale [26], they proved to be a good indicator for
the random surfer behavior on our datasets.

t = d+

t /d

In our experiments, DEM has on average by one order of
magnitude higher both target node in-degree and out-degree
than the other two datasets. This explains a quick increase
of π(cid:48)
t for smaller bias strengths. However, degree ratio is
typically larger in DEM target nodes than in ORF or W4S
target nodes and this explains a higher drain of energy and
a lower saturation level in the DEM dataset (cf. Figure 3).
Finding. For larger fractions φ of target nodes their energy
π(cid:48)
t achieved through a click bias quickly saturates across all
datasets at very high levels (> 0.8). Boost and saturation
of the energy is signiﬁcantly slower for smaller fractions φ.
The saturation level is determined by the out-degree of the
target nodes and reciprocity of outgoing links from the tar-
get nodes. For link insertion saturation existence, speed,
and levels vary between datasets and φ values. The average
degree of the original networks as well as the ratio between
out-degree and in-degree of target nodes signiﬁcantly inﬂu-
ences those eﬀects.
Implications.
In case of medium (φ = 0.1) and large
(φ = 0.2) fractions of target nodes we reach high saturation
levels with both link modiﬁcation methods even with small
bias strengths. For example, if we would like to increase
visibility of a large category in, for example Wikipedia, we
can achieve this by either slightly increasing the font size of
the links towards the articles of that category or by simple
creating some new links towards those articles. Click bias
reaches very high visibility levels consistently across several
diﬀerent datasets, whereas link insertion is dependent on
the network structure—in datasets with a smaller average
number of links we can achieve larger changes. This follows
our intuition—in a network with a smaller number of links,
each new link aﬀects the network more signiﬁcantly. How-
ever, to match the eﬀects of the click bias we need to insert
a very large amount of new links. On the other hand, in
case of small (φ = 0.01) fractions of target nodes, we can
achieve larger changes by using link insertion—we are able
to reach higher saturation levels more consistently and more
quickly regardless of the dataset. Again, we can explain this
intuitively—small fractions of target nodes have, on aver-
age, only few links pointing towards them. Hence, inserting
a new link from a top webpage achieves larger changes than
highlighting an existing (and probably negligible) link.

6.2 Navigational Boost

The blueish region from Figure 2b corresponds to smaller
and more realistic bias strengths. In practice, increasing the
visibility of a link (for example, by repositioning or increas-
ing the font size) by more than a factor of 15, meaning that it
would receive 15 times more clicks than before, seems quite
unrealistic. In particular, users position bias is estimated to

be lower than 3.5 [16,19]. Hence, we focus on bias strengths
ranging from 2 to 15 (the blueish region in Figure 2b) where
we can observe a phase of quick increase in the energy of
target nodes. We call this phase navigational boost phase.
The results for all bias strengths from 2 to 15 are quite simi-
lar and therefore we report only the results for bias strength
b = 5.
For click bias we observe a robust performance across
datasets, see Figure 4. The energy of target nodes π(cid:48)
t in-
creases almost linearly with the fraction φ of target nodes.
However, at higher φ (i.e., 0.15 ≤ φ ≤ 0.2) the linear trend
tends to ﬂatten. This is due to a transition to the stationary
phase (cf. Section 6.1). Further, we observe a rather high
variance of π(cid:48)
t over φ and diﬀerent sets of target nodes. For
example, we measure the following average standard devia-
tions over φ: W4S = 0.023, ORF = 0.103 and DEM = 0.068.
This high variance can be attributed to situations in which
smaller fractions of target nodes are often able to outper-
form larger ones. We depict one such extreme situation of
two outlier samples marked as A and B in Figure 4. Target
nodes depicted with A with φ = 0.1 reach an energy that is
almost twice as high as those of the target nodes depicted
with B with φ = 0.2.

One potential explanation for these observations is that
if the energy of target nodes of the unmodiﬁed network is
already quite high, that is, the target nodes include one or
more nodes with a substantial energy, then the click bias
acts as an ampliﬁer further magnifying the energy of target
nodes. On the other hand, target nodes with a small un-
modiﬁed energy receive indeed the amplifying eﬀect but are
never able to reach the same (high) levels of the modiﬁed
energy. Therefore, it is possible for smaller fractions of tar-
get nodes with one or more nodes with high starting energy
to outperform larger fractions of target without such nodes.
This can be further attributed to the target nodes struc-
tural properties, such as out-degree, in-degree and degree
ratio, which we introduced in the previous sections. Basi-
cally, starting energy positively correlates with in-degree of
target nodes, and therefore we can expect that the click bias
is able to amplify target nodes with a higher in-degree more
than the target nodes with a lower in-degree. In particular,
to conﬁrm this ﬁnding we conducted a similar correlation
experiment as depicted in Figure 3, but used a combination
of the target nodes in-degree and energy achieved due to a
click bias. However, due to limitations in space, we do not
report the experimental details here.
Finding. The fraction φ of target nodes does not have
a decisive eﬀect on navigational boost. Often, smaller φ
exhibit larger eﬀect sizes. Click bias acts as an ampliﬁer
that only magniﬁes what is already present in the target
nodes.

In the case of link insertion, navigational boost appears to
be highly dataset dependent (see Figure 4b). However, the
variance of each dataset individually is very low with average
standard deviations of 0.017 for W4S, 0.029 for ORF and
0.034 for DEM. Across all datasets we can observe a quick
increase in the energy of target nodes with an increasing
fraction of target nodes, which then experience a transition
towards a stable saturation phase.

To explain the diﬀerence in performance between diﬀerent
datasets we have plotted the Lorenz curves of the station-
ary distributions of our datasets (see Figure 4c). We see that
for W4S, a very small fraction of top nodes (0.01) only pos-

(a) Click Bias

(b) Link Insertion

(c) Lorenz Curve

Figure 4: Navigational Boost. Left center ﬁgures depict the energy of target nodes after modifying the network through
either inducing a click bias or link insertion respectively. The x-axes correspond to the fraction φ of target nodes, whereas
on the y-axes we denote the energy of target nodes π(cid:48)
t. Each line represents the average of 100 samples for each φ of one
dataset. The areas ﬁlled with the same color denote the corresponding standard deviations. Left. Inducing a click bias is
robust across datasets. However, the variability within values of φ is rather high. The high variance is caused by the presence
or absence of one or more nodes with high original energy in the target nodes. Thus, in cases where such nodes are present
in target nodes (depicted as point A in the plot) even smaller fractions of target nodes are able to outperform larger fractions
of target nodes without such a top node (depicted as point B in the plot). Center. On the contrary, the performance of link
insertion varies over datasets but is stable across various φ values, which is signiﬁed by the low standard deviation suggests
over φ. Right. We plot the Lorenz curve of the datasets’ original stationary distributions. We can observe that for diﬀerent
datasets these distributions are diﬀerently skewed. In particular, in DEM the energy of just a few nodes is close to 1, whereas
in ORF and W4S we need far more nodes to reach the same level (i.e., 0.4 and 0.7 respectively). This explains why we can
achieve the highest eﬀect with link insertion in DEM, followed by ORF and W4S. Thus, the performance of link insertion
depends on the initial stationary distribution of the network, whereas click biases are robust across datasets. Moreover, for
smaller fractions of target nodes link insertion constantly outperforms click biases.

sesses 0.4 of energy. Diversely, for ORF and DEM the same
fraction of top nodes already possesses energy higher than
0.85. As the out-component of a speciﬁc set of nodes acts
as a drain for the energy of source nodes, connecting source
nodes with high energy to target nodes leads to a ﬂow of en-
ergy from those source nodes towards target nodes. Thus,
the initial energy of source nodes plays a crucial role in this
process. Through link insertion from top source nodes to-
wards target nodes we attach the target nodes as drains to
such top nodes. Consequently, target nodes receive a huge
amount of energy and experience a large navigational boost
(i.e., ORF and DEM). In other words, we can say that link
insertion induces diﬀusion of the energy of top nodes to-
wards target nodes. Given the average degree of the network
and the fraction of source nodes (which increases with the
fraction φ of target nodes), we can use the Lorenz curves
to approximately predict the point where the performance
across datasets becomes similar. For example, the Lorenz
curves of DEM and ORF meet around a fraction of 0.4 of
source nodes and we can expect that the performance of
those two datasets will become similar for all fractions of
source nodes larger than 0.4. In the case of W4S, we need
a larger fraction of source nodes (0.7) to reach a similar be-
havior (cf. Figure 4c).

Comparing link insertion with click bias we ﬁnd that the
former outperforms the latter for smaller fractions φ of tar-
get nodes. For example, in the DEM dataset, link insertion
reaches four times higher energy values for the target nodes
with φ = 0.01. However, for higher values of φ the click bias
exhibits a similar performance as link insertion. Further,
in the case of the W4S dataset, the click bias even outper-
forms link insertion (see W4S in Figure 4a and Figure 4b at
φ = 0.2).
Finding. The performance of link insertion varies across

the datasets and depends on the skewness of the initial sta-
tionary distribution in a dataset. Inserting links from other
important webpages towards a given set of webpages results
in a higher navigational boost than with the click bias. This
is due to the induced diﬀusion of the energy from top nodes
towards target nodes.
Implications. If it is possible to insert new links on a web-
site (especially if the fraction of target nodes is small) we
should prefer the link insertion over the click bias. However,
creation and insertion of such links may be problematic in
practice. For example, on Wikipedia it may be diﬃcult and
semantically unjustiﬁed to insert new links to completely un-
related articles since this may have opposite and contrasting
eﬀects on the navigational behavior of users, such as confu-
sion and dissatisfaction. In those cases we may rather choose
to increase the transition probability of an already existing
link by, for example, highlighting that link (i.e., using CSS5)
or repositioning it to the webpage’s top area. In some other
scenarios (i.e., birthdays of famous inventors) implementing
a banner which contains links towards a given set of web-
pages may be an easy way to insert thousands of new links
instantly. In those cases, such user interface modiﬁcations
may prove to have higher lasting eﬀects on the stationary
probability than, for example, highlighting links.
6.3

Inﬂuence Potential

Figure 5 depicts the eﬀects of link modiﬁcations strate-
gies on the relative increase of the energy of target nodes
(i.e., inﬂuence potential). Again, we concentrated in this
experiment on realistic settings for the bias strength from
the interval [2, 15]. Since we got comparable results over
that complete interval we present only the results for bias
strength b = 5.

5cascading stylesheets

datasetW4SORFDEM0.000.050.100.150.20fraction of target nodes (φ)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7energy (π0t)Aπ0t=0.56Bπ0t=0.280.000.050.100.150.20fraction of target nodes (φ)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7energy (π0t)0.00.20.40.60.81.0fraction of source nodes0.00.20.40.60.81.0energy (πs)(a) φ = 0.01

(b) φ = 0.1

(c) φ = 0.2

Figure 6: Combinations of Link Modiﬁcation Strategies. The plots depict average results of 100 sets of target nodes of
W4S for three φ: 0.01 small on the left, 0.1 medium in the middle, and 0.2 large on the right. On the x-axes we denote α, which
deﬁnes the combination of the two link modiﬁcation strategies, whereas on the y-axes we denote the energy of target nodes.
We see that for smaller values of φ α = 0 (100% link insertion) outperforms all the others over all used bias strengths. However,
for medium and large φ values with higher bias strengths this sweet spot shifts towards higher combinations (α = 0.7). In
the other two datasets we can observe similar results.

serve over all datasets that smaller fractions of target nodes
proﬁt signiﬁcantly more from the link insertion than the
larger ones. For example, in DEM dataset for φ = 0.01 we
measure an average inﬂuence potential of more than 100,
whereas for φ = 0.2 inﬂuence potential is less than 4 (cf.
Figure 5b). A similar decay, although not as pronounced
as in DEM can be seen in the other two datasets. Simi-
larly to the navigational boost this high inﬂuence potential
of smaller fractions of target nodes in the case of link in-
sertion can be explained through the skewness of the initial
stationary distributions (cf. Figure 4c).

As previously, we investigated more closely the relation
between inﬂuence potential of small fractions of target nodes
and their structural properties such as in-degree, out-degree
and degree ratio. Target nodes with a high degree ratio
(i.e., a small in-degree, a large out-degree or both) have the
largest inﬂuence potential.
Intuitively, such target nodes
start with a very small initial energy and therefore can achieve
a signiﬁcant relative increase. On contrary, in absolute terms
such target nodes keep a rather small energy even after the
modiﬁcation, whereas target nodes with a large initial en-
ergy (a low degree ratio) are experiencing a signiﬁcant nav-
igational boost in absolute terms but possess relatively low
inﬂuence potential.
Finding. The inﬂuence potential of small fractions of target
nodes is very high regardless of the link modiﬁcation strat-
egy. For click bias the inﬂuence potential is limited by the
bias strength, whereas for link insertion we do not observe
such a limit and inﬂuence potential can become as high as
100. With increasing fraction of target nodes the inﬂuence
potential decays drastically.
Implications. As previously, if possible we should prefer
link insertion over click bias in cases where we are interested
in utilizing the inﬂuence potential of the target nodes. Our
ﬁndings suggest that in practice there is a trade-oﬀ that we
need to make between optimizing for inﬂuence potential and
for navigational boost. For the former, we need to aim at
target nodes with a high degree ratio and for the latter at
target nodes with a low degree ratio.

6.4 Combinations

In the previous experiments we found that in some situa-
tions link insertion should be preferred over click bias (e.g.,

(a) Click Bias

(b) Link Inseration

Figure 5: Inﬂuence Potential. The ﬁgure depicts the rel-
ative increase in the energy of target nodes τ with a ﬁxed
bias strength of b = 5 over diﬀerent φ and datasets. Left.
Inducing a click bias performs robustly over all datasets.
Inﬂuence potential correlates negatively with the fraction of
target nodes, that is, the relative increase in energy is higher
for small fractions of target nodes than for large fractions.
Right. With link insertion, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant variance in
performance across the three diﬀerent datasets. This con-
ﬁrms our ﬁndings from the previous section—the skewness
of the original stationary distribution determines the eﬀec-
tiveness of the link insertion strategy in a dataset. Similarly
to the click bias, the inﬂuence potential decays with an in-
creasing fraction of target nodes.

The performance of the click bias is robust across datasets
and diﬀerent φ with a low variance in both dimensions (cf.
Figure 5a). We observe a negative correlation between in-
ﬂuence potential and fraction φ of target nodes, meaning
the smaller fractions of target nodes proﬁt more from an in-
duced click bias than larger fractions. Our calculations of
the inﬂuence potential conﬁrm once more the results from
the previous section, in which smaller fractions with top en-
ergy nodes are able to outperform larger fractions of target
nodes without top nodes. We once more depict two such
examples from Figure 4a. Target nodes depicted by A with
φ = 0.1 reach an energy that is almost twice as high as
those depicted by B with φ = 0.2. However, nodes A start
with a larger initial energy and nodes B with a smaller one.
Therefore, in relative terms nodes B have a higher inﬂuence
potential than nodes A (cf. Figure 5a).

Performance of link insertion is again strongly dependent
of the dataset. However, similarly to the click bias we ob-

biasstrength(b)125150.00.20.40.60.81.0mixing factor (α)0.00.20.40.60.81.0energy (π0t)link insertionclick bias0.00.20.40.60.81.0mixing factor (α)0.00.20.40.60.81.0energy (π0t)0.00.20.40.60.81.0mixing factor (α)0.00.20.40.60.81.0energy (π0t)datasetW4SORFDEM0.000.050.100.150.20fraction of target nodes (φ)101102influence potential (τ)AB0.000.050.100.150.20fraction of target nodes (φ)101102influence potential (τ)small fraction φ of target nodes), whereas sometimes the
opposite represents an optimal approach (e.g., large φ). For
that reason we want now to shed more light onto combi-
nations of both strategies, that is, we are interested in the
navigational eﬀects of simultaneously applying click bias and
link insertion to varying extent. Figure 6 depicts the results
of this experiment. We ﬁnd consistent best performing mix-
tures over all datasets.
In particular, we observe that for
small fractions φ of target nodes, exclusive link insertion
outperforms any other combination (see Figure 6a). For
medium sized target nodes (i.e., φ = 0.1) we observe a shift
of best performing combinations towards α = 0.9 for higher
bias strengths (i.e., b = 5 and b = 15). This combination
consist of 90% click bias and 10% link insertion. For com-
binations of large fractions of target nodes (i.e., φ = 0.2)
and small bias strengths (b = 2) the best performing com-
bination is around α = 0.5 (50% click bias and 50% link
insertion) and further shifts towards α = 0.9 (90% click bias
and 10% link insertion) with an increased bias strength.

These results conﬁrm our insights from the previous ex-
periments. Thus, click biases act as an ampliﬁer and only
work well if target nodes initially possess valuable incom-
ing links. This is highly likely for larger and medium sized
fractions of target nodes, and very unlikely for the case of
smaller fractions of target nodes. On the other hand, link
insertion diﬀuses a large portion of the energy of top nodes
towards target nodes. Hence, it works especially well for
combinations of small fractions of target nodes and datasets
with a highly skewed stationary distribution.
Finding. For small fractions of target nodes with initially
low energy, pure link insertion should be preferred over any
other combination. However, with increasing bias strength
and larger fraction of target nodes, combinations consisting
of 90% click bias and 10% link insertion performs best.
Implications. Smaller sets of webpages (i.e., small φ) should
focus on introducing new links to achieve the highest brows-
ing guidance. The bigger the set of webpages and the used
bias strength becomes, the more this preference shifts to-
wards a combination of 0.9, meaning that 90% of the modi-
ﬁcations should be invested in increasing the transition prob-
ability of already existing links towards target nodes (e.g.,
highlighting in the user interface). The remaining 10% should
be used to insert new links towards target nodes.

6.5 Stationary vs. Transient User Behavior

The random surfer which navigates forever (stationary be-
havior) may look like a rather unrealistic behavior of users.
More realistically, a single user visits a website clicks a cou-
ple of times on various links and leaves the website again
(transient behavior). However, our calculations of the sta-
tionary distribution show that, at least on the networks that
we have investigated in this paper these two behaviors are
quite similar to each other.

The stationary distribution is calculated with the power-
iteration method [11]. Thus, we initialize a probability vec-
tor representing an initial probability to ﬁnd a random surfer
on each particular node in the network. We initialize this
vector using a uniform distribution. Afterwards, we iter-
ate by recalculating the probabilities for the next click of
the random surfer. Thus, one iteration step of the power-
iteration method can be interpreted as a step or a click
performed by the random surfer moving from the current
node to one of its neighbors. Hence, the number of iteration

steps that are needed until there are no signiﬁcant changes
in the node probabilities, that is, the convergence rate of
the power-iteration method, can be interpreted as the num-
ber of clicks needed to model the stationary user behavior.
In other words the random surfer does not need to navigate
forever—it only needs to navigate through the network until
the point where the next click does not change the observed
stationary distribution.

In all our datasets, all networks that we generated and
modiﬁed for these datasets, all combinations of fractions
of target nodes φ and the bias strength b our calculations
converge within 8 iterations. Thus, the stationary user be-
havior is in fact a behavior of users who navigate 8 pages
in a website at most. We believe that these 8 clicks are
within realistic boundaries for user behavior in the cases in
which users decide to explore and browse a website. How-
ever, since many users leave a website immediately upon
arrival or within only a single or a small number of clicks
this still represents a limitation in our work. This limita-
tion can be easily remedied by introducing a small telepor-
tation probability of jumping to an arbitrary page without
following the underlying network structure (i.e., calculating
PageRank vector instead of the stationary distribution). We
have already experimented with the calculations of PageR-
ank and our ﬁrst results are quite similar to results that we
have presented in this paper. However, we plan to address
this question in more details in our future work.

7. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have analyzed the eﬀects of two link mod-
iﬁcation strategies used to inﬂuence the typical whereabouts
of the random surfer. We investigated how an induced click
bias towards a set of webpages changes the stationary distri-
bution (i.e., energy) of those pages. Additionally, we com-
pared those eﬀects with the consequences of altering the
network structure by inserting new links. We ﬁnd that both
strategies have a high potential to modify the stationary
distribution and that for certain situations there exist con-
stantly high performing link modiﬁcation strategy. In par-
ticular, click biases work well on sets of webpages contain-
ing already highly visible webpages, whereas link insertion
should be preferred for sets of webpages consisting of pages
with low visibility. Further, we showed that a simple struc-
tural property of target nodes, namely degree ratio, provides
a valuable basis for the estimation of the eﬀects of both link
modiﬁcation strategies. Administrators of websites can use
our approach and our open source framework to determine
the best strategy for their settings without having to imple-
ment and test all the diﬀerent strategies (e.g., altering link
position, highlighting, or creating new links).

In future work our analysis can be extended to investigate
additional empirical as well as synthetic datasets to broaden
the understanding of consequences of manipulating the link
selection process in navigation or inserting new links. Fur-
thermore, investigating the complex dynamics which arise
if we induce two competing link modiﬁcations into one net-
work at the same time is an interesting avenue for future
work.

8. REFERENCES
[1] S. Al-Saﬀar and G. Heileman. Experimental bounds
on the usefulness of personalized and topic-sensitive

pagerank. In Web Intelligence, IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on, pages 671–675. IEEE,
2007.

[2] L. Bian and H. Holtzman. Online friend

recommendation through personality matching and
collaborative ﬁltering. Proc. of UBICOMM, pages
230–235, 2011.

[3] M. Bianchini, M. Gori, and F. Scarselli. Inside

pagerank. ACM Trans. Internet Technol., 5(1):92–128,
Feb. 2005.

[4] S. Brin and L. Page. Reprint of: The anatomy of a

large-scale hypertextual web search engine. Computer
networks, 56(18):3825–3833, 2012.

[5] G. Buscher, E. Cutrell, and M. R. Morris. What do
you see when you’re surﬁng?: using eye tracking to
predict salient regions of web pages. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on human factors in
computing systems, pages 21–30. ACM, 2009.

[6] D. Dimitrov, P. Singer, F. Lemmerich, and

M. Strohmaier. Visual Positions of Links and Clicks
on Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’16
Companion, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.

[7] C. Ding, X. He, P. Husbands, H. Zha, and H. D.

Simon. Pagerank, hits and a uniﬁed framework for
link analysis. In Proceedings of the 25th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pages 353–354.
ACM, 2002.

[8] C. H. Ding, H. Zha, X. He, P. Husbands, and H. D.

Simon. Link analysis: hubs and authorities on the
world wide web. SIAM review, 46(2):256–268, 2004.

[9] F. Geigl, D. Lamprecht, R. Hofmann-Wellenhof,

S. Walk, M. Strohmaier, and D. Helic. Random surfers
on a web encyclopedia. In Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Knowledge Technologies
and Data-driven Business, i-KNOW ’15, pages
5:1–5:8, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.

information networks based on decentralized search.
In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Conference on
Hypertext and Social Media, pages 89–98. ACM, 2013.

[16] T. Hogg and K. Lerman. Disentagling the eﬀects of

social signals. Human Computation Journal,
2(2):189–208, 2015.

[17] J. M. Kleinberg. Authoritative sources in a

hyperlinked environment. Journal of the ACM
(JACM), 46(5):604–632, 1999.

[18] A. N. Langville and C. D. Meyer. Deeper inside

pagerank. Internet Mathematics, 1(3):335–380, 2004.
[19] K. Lerman and T. Hogg. Leveraging position bias to

improve peer recommendation. PLoS ONE,
9(6):e98914, 06 2014.

[20] N. Li and G. Chen. Multi-layered friendship modeling

for location-based mobile social networks. In Mobile
and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking Services,
MobiQuitous, 2009. MobiQuitous ’09. 6th Annual
International, pages 1–10, July 2009.

[21] L. Lov´asz. Random walks on graphs: A survey.

Combinatorics, Paul erdos is eighty, 2(1):1–46, 1993.

[22] M. Moricz, Y. Dosbayev, and M. Berlyant. Pymk:

Friend recommendation at myspace. In Proceedings of
the 2010 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data, SIGMOD ’10, pages 999–1002,
New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

[23] J. Murphy, C. Hofacker, and R. Mizerski. Primacy and

recency eﬀects on clicking behavior. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(2):522–535,
2006.

[24] U. Y. Ogras and R. Marculescu. ” it’s a small world

after all”: Noc performance optimization via
long-range link insertion. Very Large Scale Integration
(VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions on,
14(7):693–706, 2006.

[25] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. The
pagerank citation ranking: bringing order to the web.
1999.

[10] D. F. Gleich, P. G. Constantine, A. D. Flaxman, and

[26] G. Pandurangan, P. Raghavan, and E. Upfal. Using

A. Gunawardana. Tracking the random surfer:
empirically measured teleportation parameters in
pagerank. In Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web, pages 381–390. ACM,
2010.

[11] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan. Matrix
computations, volume 3. JHU Press, 2012.

[12] Z. Gy¨ongyi, H. Garcia-Molina, and J. Pedersen.

Combating web spam with trustrank. In Proceedings
of the Thirtieth international conference on Very large
data bases-Volume 30, pages 576–587. VLDB
Endowment, 2004.

[13] T. H. Haveliwala. Topic-sensitive pagerank. In

Proceedings of the 11th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 517–526. ACM, 2002.
[14] T. H. Haveliwala. Topic-sensitive pagerank: A

context-sensitive ranking algorithm for web search.
Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions
on, 15(4):784–796, 2003.

[15] D. Helic, M. Strohmaier, M. Granitzer, and
R. Scherer. Models of human navigation in

pagerank to characterize web structure. In Computing
and Combinatorics, pages 330–339. Springer, 2002.

[27] M. Richardson and P. Domingos. The intelligent

surfer: Probabilistic combination of link and content
information in pagerank. In NIPS, pages 1441–1448,
2001.

[28] N. Silva, I.-R. Tsang, G. Cavalcanti, and I.-J. Tsang.

A graph-based friend recommendation system using
genetic algorithm. In Evolutionary Computation
(CEC), 2010 IEEE Congress on, pages 1–7, July 2010.

[29] R. West and J. Leskovec. Automatic versus human

navigation in information networks. In ICWSM, 2012.

[30] W. Woess. Random walks on inﬁnite graphs and
groups-a survey on selected topics. Bulletin of the
London Mathematical Society, 26(1):1–60, 1994.

[31] X. Xie. Potential friend recommendation in online

social network. In Green Computing and
Communications (GreenCom), 2010 IEEE/ACM Int’l
Conference on Int’l Conference on Cyber, Physical
and Social Computing (CPSCom), pages 831–835, Dec
2010.

