6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]
h
c
e
m

-
t
a
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Hierarchy of Multi-Lane Entropy Machines with Unfair Resource Availability

Ayse Ferhan Yesil* and M. Cemal Yalabik

Department of Physics, Bilkent University, Bilkent, 06800, Ankara, Turkey

(Dated: March 22, 2016)

We present a model system for objects, climbers, which have the ability to move as ASEP particles
with non-uniform forward and backward jumping rate dynamics. These climbers are implemented as
Mandal-Quan-Jarzynski [1] machines. Climbers on a number of neighboring columns are considered.
The low entropy resource is provided abundantly to the ﬁrst column, the unused part of this resource
is consecutively passed over to objects in neighboring columns. This results in a hierarchy among the
lanes. The system displays interesting steady-states. Both open and periodic boundary conditions
are considered and results from Monte Carlo simulations of the system will be reported.

I.

INTRODUCTION

II. THE BUILDING BLOCK

Our understanding of the association of physical means
of handling information with thermodynamic entropy has
evolved due to the seminal work of Landauer [1]. This
work led to the understanding that the entropy produced
by generating randomness in some type of physically
stored data must be taken into consideration when cal-
culating the change in the total entropy associated with
the functioning of the system.

Recently, Mandal et al. have demonstrated the possi-
bility of a refrigerator running on information[2, 3]. The
system extracts heat from a low temperature source and
places it at a higher temperature, without utilizing any
mechanical energy input. Second law is still satisﬁed as
entropy is produced by irreversibly modifying the con-
tents of a “tape” which is used as a medium to process
information associated with the state of the system. The
authors allude to the Maxwell Demon for obvious rea-
sons.

In this present work, we study the collective behavior
of a number of “machines” which run on information.
The inter-dependency of the machines is due to a con-
ﬁguration in which the information output of some ma-
chines are fed to other machines lower in a hierarchy of
information access. Machines in the highest level of hi-
erarchy have access to a periodic supply of low-entropy
information. Machines at lower levels of hierarchy have
to function with lower eﬃciency due to the deteriorated
information supply.

The model has some features associated with driven
diﬀusive systems, especially with ASEP systems[5, 6], in
terms of its dynamics. Although multilane versions of
such systems have been studied[4], the emphasis has been
on availability of multiple channels for transport, rather
than a competition between them.

Even though it is tempting to associate some particu-
lars of this study with social structures and their opera-
tions, the model obviously is too simplistic even for real
physical problems.

Figure 1 gives a brief description of the refrigerator
proposed by Mandal et al.[2, 3] and the machine which is
used as a building block of various system conﬁgurations
studied in this work.

Note that in both machines, transitions may inﬂuence
a status bit, which is set to a new value periodically, with
period τ . (See references [2, 3].) The periodic updating
of the status bit should be interpreted as setting the ma-
chine status to an “input” bit, while the previous status
is released as “output”. (A “tape” structure is envisioned
which contains these input and output bits.) Best ma-
chine performance will be obtained if this new value is
always equal to zero, corresponding to a low entropy.

The machine in Figure 1b for example, will start its
cycle at a certain energy level in status zero.
It will
end up in the higher energy state at the end of the
period, with status one, after the time period τ , with
probability pc,u = ωu[1 − exp(−Ωτ )]/Ω. Here, Ω is the
sum of ωu for the transition rate from the lower energy
level to the higher one, and ωd for the reverse process.
The transitions are driven by the heat bath at temper-
ature T so that ωd/ωu = exp(E0/kBT ). Therefore, en-
ergy is extracted from the single heat bath at the rate
P = E0pc,u/τ , corresponding to an overall entropy reduc-
tion rate E0pc,u/T τ . Second law is not violated because
conversion of the status bit from zero to one with prob-
ability pc,u corresponds to an entropy production rate of
−kB[pc,u log(pc,u) + (1 − pc,u) log(1 − pc,u)]/τ .

We now proceed to study this machine, when it is oper-
ating with random input status bits, equal to zero with
probability p0. Note that we now allow the possibility
that the energy state of the machine may go down a step
within time τ , as its status may be set to one by the in-
put stream. The probability that the energy state of the
machine is lowered by E0 at the end of the period τ is
pc,d = ωd[1 − exp(−Ωτ )]/Ω. We then have the following
probabilities just before the next periodic status update:

P (Higher energy level) = p0pc,u
P (Lower energy level) = (1 − p0)pc,d
P (Same energy level) = p0(1 − pc,u) + (1 − p0)(1 − pc,d)

)
T
(
*
p

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0

2

 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

kT/Eo

FIG. 2. The minimum value for p0 as a function of kBT /E0
in order to produce positive amout of work. Note that p0
must be close to one in order to extract work from a low
temperature bath, while for a high temperatue bath, p0 values
closer to 0.5 may be used.

T
k
/
S
∆

 1.4

 1.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

Po

FIG. 3. Total entropy produced by the machine for Ωτ = 3
and kBT /E0 = 1 yielding a value p∗(T ) ∼ 0.73.

also be written as

0 = p0 + (p∗(T ) − p0)[1 − exp(−Ωτ )].
p′

(Primed variables will be used to identify the quanti-
ties associated with the output of the machine.)
It is
apparent that the machine behaves in qualitatively dif-
ferent forms when p0 < p∗(T ) and p0 > p∗(T ). When
p0 > p∗(T ), mechanical work is generated using the en-
ergy input from the heat bath. The string of zeros and
0 closer to p∗(T )
ones released by the machine then has a p′
in comparison to the input string. On the other hand,
for p0 < p∗(T ) mechanical work is converted to heat,
but the entropy of the output string is reduced with a

FIG. 1. The refrigerator studied in reference [2] (a) and the
basic building block of the systems analyzed in this work (b).
The machines reside in one of the states denoted by black
circles. Information is accessible as a “tape” (or a “status”
in (b)) bit which is (optimally) refreshed periodically to value
zero (the dotted arrows). Otherwise, the system may make
transitions between two energy levels E0 apart, under the ef-
fect of heat baths with temperatures Th and Tl. (A single
heat bath at temperature T is present at (b).) With proper
choice of parameters, on the average, heat is taken from the
low temperature (Tl) bath and deposited to the bath at the
higher temperature Th by the machine at (a). The machine
at (b) will eventually end up at the higher energy state, ex-
tracting E0 from the single heat bath at temperature T .

The rate at which energy is extracted from the heat
bath will be P = sE0/τ with s the expectation value
of the change in the energy ladder step: s = p0pc,u −
(1 − p0)pc,d. Note that in order for this quantity to be
positive, one needs to have p0/(1 − p0) > pc,d/pc,u =
exp(E0/kBT ). This condition implies

p0 > p∗(T )

where

p∗(T ) = 1/(1 + exp(−E0/kBT )).

The above relations can then be written in a more com-
pact way using

s = (p0 − p∗(T ))[1 − exp(−Ωτ )].

The probability that the machine will release a zero (as
the previous status state) at the next periodic status up-
date will be p′
0 = p0(1 − pc,u) + (1 − p0)pc,d which may

higher probability of zeros. The machine then acts as an
“eraser”. Figure 2 shows the variation of p∗(T ) as a func-
tion of temperature. Extraction of mechanical work from
a lower temperature heat bath requires higher values for
p0.

The entropy change associated with the mechanical en-

ergy is

Smech/kB =

E0
kBT

(p∗

− p0)[1 − exp(−Ωτ )]

while the change in the information entropy is

∆SI = SI (p′

0) − SI (p0)

with

SI (p)/kB = −p ln p − (1 − p) ln(1 − p).

In any case, the overall entropy increases, as expected
(Figure 3).

If a second machine is using the output of the ﬁrst
machine as its input, the corresponding parameter for
the work takes a very simple form: s′ = p′∆ − (1 − p′)δ =
s exp(−Ωτ ). That is, if the periodic status update time
is suﬃciently long, the output status bits produced by
the ﬁrst machine, on the average, is essentially a useless
sequence for utilization in another identical machine.

III. THE MODEL

A model is now proposed in which the structure in Fig-
ure 1b is repeated in neighboring columns. Machines are
allowed to climb up (or down) each column, height along
the column being associated with the energy state of the
machine. (We will allow more than one machine to op-
erate on a column.) Diﬀerent status bits are associated
with each position of the thus formed lattice. (Initially
all status bits are set to one.) A description of the dy-
namics of a machine along a column is given in Figure
4. Machines may modify the status bits of the sites they
move into: A machine with status zero may move up in
the lattice, only if the new site is unoccupied and has
status zero. The status of the new site will then be mod-
iﬁed as one. Restrictions for going down in energy is the
reverse: Machine must start from a site with status one,
and may land in a new (unoccupied) site with status 0.
The status of the original site is returned to zero. At
refresh times all status bits are shifted one column to the
column on the right. Fresh status bits (all zeros) are fed
from the left to all positions of the leftmost column.

This structure then puts the machines in the leftmost
column in a more advantageous position: They can only
move up in energy, possibly being restricted by the pres-
ence of other machines in the same column. This type of
motion is a type of TASEP (totally asymmetric simple
exclusion process[5, 6]), with a somewhat complicated
jump rate. The status bits drifting towards the right at

3

FIG. 4. Motion of a machine along a column. Small circles
denote the possible positions of a machine, with increasing
energy in the vertical direction. Larger circle represents the
position of the machine. It may move up or down along the
energy ladder under the inﬂuence of the heat bath at temper-
ature T . The numbers next to the circles represent the status
bits that change during the transition. The x and y variables
denote the status bits which remain unchanged.

periodic refresh intervals provide columns to the right
with lower and lower “quality” status bits to work with.
We study two types of models: In both of them there
are 40 columns. In the ﬁrst model, we consider a semi-
inﬁnite lattice in the energy direction, with a lower bound
“ground state” energy. We start with a completely un-
occupied lattice, with an entry rate of α into the lowest
energy state if it is unoccupied and has status zero. (This
again provides a hierarchical advantage to columns that
are closer to the left boundary.) Note that this system
will not reach a steady state, and we report the statisti-
cal results of a ﬁnite time (albeit unfair) “race” among
the columns.

In the second model we assume periodic boundary
conditions in the energy direction.
(Step-wise motion
in such non-conservative force ﬁelds has been very elo-
quently studied by Escher[7].) Here, we produce steady
state results which indicate that although this race on a
ring is still unfair, disadvantaged machines tend to align
themselves at positions where they avoid the partially de-
pleted outputs of machines to their left, and use the the

ρ
i1

α=0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
1.0

0.8

ρ
i1

α=1.0

0.6

0.4

α=0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
1.0

value 0.5, between the entry and exit boundary regions.)
Figure 5 shows the density proﬁle along the ﬁrst col-
umn, for various values of the entry rate α. The density
of machines away from the entry boundary seem to have

4

20

40

60

80

i

 100

u

 10

 1

300

u j1.8

α=0.1

α=0.35

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0

 0

α=0.1

i

 200

 400

 600

 800

 1000

 0.1

FIG. 5. Density proﬁle along the ﬁrst column, for various
values of the entry rate α. The inset shows the detail near
the entry boundary. Note that apart from a small boundary
region, the density proﬁle becomes undiscernable for α ≥ 0.35.

 0.01

 1

100

30

 1

α=0.1

α=0.35

 10

j

 100

 10

j

 100

remnants of the fresh status bits that were untouched.

IV. RESULTS

The models described above using a Kinetic Monte
Carlo procedure[8]. The values reported in this section
typically involve the average of 100 independent runs for
the semi-inﬁnite system and 106 Monte Carlo steps for
the ring systems. (One Monte Carlo step is deﬁned as
the period in which all objects in the system move once
on the average.)

The ﬁrst column of the ﬁrst model (on a semi-inﬁnite
lattice) is a TASEP system, as mentioned before. Al-
though the inﬁnite size of the lattice does not allow a
steady state to be reached through a simulation, the cur-
rent and density near the entry point (the ground state)
should reach a steady state. A direct comparison with
known results for this model is not available, due to the
complications introduced to the transition rates through
the periodic status update. Nevertheless, one would ex-
pect to see the phase transition (apparent due to the
discontinuities in the second derivatives of density and
current as a function of entry rate) near a value of the
entry rate which produces a density ρ ∼ 0.5. Studies on
ﬁnite size TASEP systems with open boundaries yield a
“bulk” density which changes as a function of α until a
critical value is reached (αc = 0.5 for the simple system
in [6]). For values of α > αc the bulk density stays ﬁxed
at 0.5.
(Actually, in this regime, the “bulk” region is
formed by a linear change in density, averaging to the

FIG. 6. Total energy produced in the jth column (in units
of E0) with uj = Pi iρij corresponding to the distribution in
Figure 5. The inset is a plot of j 1.8uj to display the power
law behavior. The plots are for α = 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3
and 0.35. Note that curves for α > 0.2 are undiscernable.

a universal proﬁle, independent of the value of α. This
proﬁle is formed by the pioneer machines which are “ﬁll-
ing up” empty space in front of them. The density be-
hind this front depends on the value of α: For values of
α greater than about 0.35, the density front reaches very
near the entry boundary. For smaller values of α, the
density proﬁle reaches the entry boundary with a value
which depends on α, with no appreciable boundary eﬀect.
The critical density value corresponding to the change of
behavior is again 0.5.

The current along the columns is a measure of of the
rate at which energy is being absorbed from the heat
bath. That in turn is related to the supply of low en-
tropy status bits to the machines. The total current at
the entry boundary, corresponding to the energy produc-
tion rate of machines on 40 columns (each feeding on
the remnants of the entropy resource left from the pre-
vious column), adds up to what is available at the left-
most column. Indeed, we ﬁnd that the total entry rate
of machines to the system is independent of the value
of α. How that resource utilization rate is distributed
among the columns does of course depend on α, and is
shown in Figure 6. Note that smaller values of the entry
rate correspond to more a equitable (among the hierar-
chies) distribution for the utilization of the low entropy
resource.

Authors acknowledge support from Turkish Academy

of Sciences.

[1] R. Landauer, IBM Journal of Research and Development

5, 183 (1961).

[2] D. Mandal and C. Jarzynski, PNAS 109, 11641 (2012).
[3] D. Mandal, H. T. Quan,

and C.

Jarzynski,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 030602 (2013).

[4] A. I. Curatolo, M. R. Evans, Y. Kafri and J. Tailleur

5

[5] J. Krug, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1882 (1991).
[6] M. R. Evans, D. P. Foster, C. Godr‘eche, and D. Mukamel,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 208 (1995).

[7] M. C. Escher, “Ascending and Descending” in The magic
of M.C. Escher by M. C. Escher, Barnes & Noble (2006).
[8] A. B. Bortz, M. H. Kalos and J. L. Lebowitz, Journal of

J. Phys. A 49, 095601 (2016).

Computational Physics 17 (1975).

