Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with
integrated optical cavities

Nina Podoliak1, Hiroki Takahashi2, Matthias Keller2, Peter
Horak1
1 Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17
1BJ, U.K.
2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sussex, Falmer, BN1 9QH,
U.K.

E-mail: N.Podoliak@soton.ac.uk

Abstract. We study a range of radio-frequency ion trap geometries and investigate
the eﬀect of integrating dielectric cavity mirrors on their trapping potential. We aim
to identify ion trap and cavity conﬁgurations that are best suited for achieving small
cavity volumes and thus large ion-photon coupling as required for scalable quantum
information networks. In particular, we investigate the trapping potential distortions
caused by the dielectric material of the cavity mirrors for diﬀerent mirror orientations
with respect to the trapping electrodes, as well as for mirror misalignment. We also
analyze the eﬀect of the mirror material properties such as dielectric constants and
surface conductivity, and study the eﬀect of surface charges on the mirrors. The
smallest trapping potential distortions are found if the cavities are aligned along the
major symmetry axis of the electrode geometries. These cavity conﬁgurations also
appear to be the most stable with respect to any mirror misalignment.

PACS numbers: 37.10.Ty, 33.50.Dq, 82.80.Ms, 34.70.+e

Submitted to: New J. Phys.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
4
4
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

2

1. Introduction

Atomic ions held in radio frequency traps are currently among the most successful
implementations of quantum information processing (QIP). Their near-ideal isolation
from the environment enables long coherence times for the electronic and motional
quantum states of trapped ions. Using resonant electromagnetic radiation, those
quantum states can be manipulated and interrogated with high ﬁdelity. As a
consequence, a set of universal quantum gates and quantum algorithms have been
demonstrated successfully (e.g.
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]) and strings of up to 14 ions have
been entangled [7]. All of these achievements, however, employ the ions’ joint motion
in a single trapping potential to implement collective quantum logic operations. As the
number of ions in a trap increases, so do the challenges in QIP. This is because addressing
individual motional modes and individual ions become increasingly more diﬃcult in a
longer ion string. Hence ion trap QIP in single axial potentials is not deemed scalable to
large numbers of qubits. To circumvent this problem, Kielpinski et al. [8] proposed to
construct a large scale ion-trap quantum computer from interlinked segments of small
ion traps. In this architecture ions are shuttled between segments for communication
of quantum information while each segment operates on only a small number of ions.
Even though there has been notable progress based on this proposal [9, 10], there are
still technological challenges to overcome, such as anomalous motional heating [11], fast
ion shuttling with negligible decoherence [12, 13] and the demonstration of multi-ion
manipulation in segmented traps.

Another approach to scale up ion-trap based QIP systems is to utilize optical links.
An optical resonator coupled with trapped ions provides a deterministic ion-photon
interface for quantum networking [14, 15, 16]. After the early demonstrations of ions
localized in optical cavities [17, 18] several important experimental landmarks have
been demonstrated, such as the generation of single photons [19, 20], the generation
of entanglement between a single ion and a single photon [21] and the heralded
entanglement of two intra-cavity ions [22]. Despite these successful demonstrations
currently cavity-based ion-photon interfaces are limited by the weak interaction between
the ions and cavity mode. To achieve high ﬁdelity and highly eﬃcient ion-photon
interfaces, the coherent interaction strength between the ion and the cavity must be
larger than the decoherence rates of the ion and cavity states. This strong coupling
regime can be achieved by reducing the mode volume of the cavity. However reducing
the physical volume of an optical cavity around trapped ions is complicated by the
fact that the dielectric surfaces of the cavity mirrors can adversely aﬀect the trapping
potential [23]. While strong coupling has been demonstrated in systems with neutral
atoms and collectively with many ions [24], it still remains elusive for a single ion
despite many proposed designs and implementations [25, 26, 27, 28].
In this regard
the development of ﬁber-based Fabry-Perot cavities [29] has oﬀered a new promising
perspective for integrating small optical cavities in ion traps. Their reduced size and
possibility of tight integration and electrical shielding has the potential to achieve a small

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

3

cavity mode volume without seriously compromising the trapping stability [30, 31].

Taking the integration of ﬁber cavities in ion traps as a basic design for the ion-
photon quantum interface, in this article, we present detailed systematic studies of
the eﬀects of dielectric materials in the vicinity of ion traps. Evolving from the original
parabolic Paul traps, currently a range of diﬀerent trap designs is available. We consider
several diﬀerent geometries of rf ion traps and compare them in terms of stability against
the inﬂuence of dielectric mirrors. The trap stabilities are mainly evaluated with trap
depths and trap secular frequencies. A large trap depth allows a long trapping life time
even under collisions with background gas particles. High trap secular frequencies are
vital in achieving good localization of a trapped ion in an optical cavity, which leads to
a well-deﬁned and uncompromized ion-cavity coupling.

2. Ion trap and cavity geometries

We consider ﬁve diﬀerent ion trap geometries (see ﬁgure 1): two linear traps, two
cylindrical traps and a planar surface trap. All traps have a typical electrode separation
of 1 mm to allow easy comparison. The ﬁrst linear trap is shown in ﬁgure 1(a); it consists
of four blade-shaped electrodes with an edge angle of 45◦ [19]. The second trap, shown
in ﬁgure 1(b), has four planar electrodes of 0.25 mm thickness [32]. In both traps the
horizontal and vertical separations between the electrodes are 1 mm and the electrode
length along the trap axis is 6 mm. The trapping potential is generated by applying
an rf voltage to the two diagonally opposing electrodes while the remaining electrodes
are grounded (see ﬁgure 1). Usually a set of dc electrodes along the z-axis is used to
provide an axial conﬁnement in linear traps. However in this article, we omit these dc
electrodes for the sake of simplicity and focus on the eﬀects of the cavity mirrors to the
rf potentials in the linear traps. This is because disturbances to a dc potential can be
accommodated with compensation dc voltages whereas disturbances to rf potentials are
harder to handle and more critical for the trapping stability.

The cylindrical traps are the endcap [31] and the stylus trap [33]. The endcap trap
geometry consists of a pair of two concentric hollow cylinders as shown in ﬁgure 1(c).
The inner diameters of the inner and outer electrodes are 1 mm and 2 mm respectively
with their thickness being 0.1 mm. By applying an rf voltage to the inner electrodes
while grounding the outer ones, a ponderomotive potential is created with a potential
minimum at the center of the electrode gap. The inner electrode protrudes by 0.5 mm
from the outer electrode. The vertical inter-electrode distances are 1 mm and 2 mm for
the inner and outer electrodes respectively. The stylus trap is formed by a single set
of concentric cylinders of the same dimensions as the endcap trap with an additional
grounded plate (see ﬁgure 1(d)). The cylindrical electrodes protrude by 0.5 mm from the
ground plane. Applying an rf voltage to the outer cylinder while keeping all the other
electrodes grounded creates a ponderomotive potential with a local minimum above the
center electrode.

The planar surface trap consists of four parallel electrodes of an identical shape on

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

4

Figure 1. Geometries of ion traps with integrated optical cavities: (a) linear trap
with blade shaped electrodes; (b) linear trap with wafer electrodes; (c) endcap trap;
(d) stylus trap; (e) surface trap.
’rf’ and ’gnd’ mark rf- and grounded electrodes,
respectively. For each trap geometry diﬀerent cavity orientations are considered in this
article, e.g. with cavities along the x-, y-, or z-axis. The insets show the unperturbed
trapping potentials for the respective traps.

a ﬂat surface as shown in ﬁgure 1(e). The electrode height is 0.1 mm and the width is
0.2125 mm with gaps between them of 0.05 mm, which makes the total width of the
trap to be 1 mm. The trapping potential is generated by applying an rf voltage to
two interleaved electrodes while grounding the remaining ones. This forms a trapping
potential with a minimum above the electrode plane on the center line of the electrode
conﬁguration.

In all the ion traps, the optical cavity is modeled as a pair of glass cylinders with
a diameter of 0.7 mm and a dielectric constant of  = 3.8 for silica glass. The eﬀect
of the mirror facets with potentially diﬀerent materials from the mirror substrate is
considered in section 7. We investigate diﬀerent cavity orientations with respect to the
trap electrodes. For the linear traps, mirrors can be aligned either along the x-, y-, or
z-axis, as shown in ﬁgure 2 using the blade trap as an example. For the cylindrical traps,
the geometries with mirrors oriented along the x- and z-axis are equivalent, therefore
for these traps only two cavity orientations along the x-axis (mirrors from the side to
the trap) and along the y-axis (mirrors inside the central electrodes) are modeled. For
the surface trap, mirrors are aligned either along the x-, y- or z-axis and positioned
symmetrically around the rf-nodal line. In the case of mirrors aligned perpendicular to
the trap surface (along the y-axis), the modeled domain includes only one mirror above
the trap surface, as the second mirror would be positioned below the substrate, where

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

5

Figure 2. Three orientations of optical cavities integrated in the blade linear trap.
Cavities oriented along the (a) x-, (b) y-, and (c) z-axis.

the rf-ﬁeld is screened by the substrate. In this case, the substrate would also have a
hole between the two electrodes in the center to allow the formation of an optical mode
between the mirrors.

3. Simulating the trapping potentials

Rf-electric ﬁeld proﬁles and trapping pseudopotentials created around the trap
electrodes are numerically calculated by a ﬁnite element method using Comsol

Multiphysics R(cid:13) (AC/DC module). In all the cases we assume an rf-voltage amplitude

of 200 V at 10 MHz. For each trap we determine the calculation domain dimensions at
which the outer boundaries do not aﬀect the rf-ﬁeld in the middle of the trap. Then, the
pseudopotential Φpseudo experienced by a trapped ion is calculated from the numerically
determined electric ﬁeld (cid:126)E through

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:126)E

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

Φpseudo =

Q

4M Ω2

,

(1)

with the ion charge Q, its mass M and the angular frequency Ω of the rf voltage.
Throughout this article we use calcium-40 ions with M = 40 au and Q = 1 e where au
and e are the atomic mass unit (= 1.66×10−27 kg) and elementary charge (= 1.60×10−19
C) respectively. Secular frequencies of the ion are obtained by ﬁtting the corresponding
pseudopotentials around the trap center by a parabola. A trap depth is extracted as
the minimal potential barrier height from the trap center along a particular direction.
Table 1 contains trap depths and secular frequencies for calcium ions in diﬀerent trap
geometries for the trap parameters given above in the absence of optical cavities.

The linear traps create the deepest potential traps. The traps with the blade and
wafer shaped electrodes are characterized by the same trap depths along the y-axis,
but the trap depth along the x-axis for the blade trap is ∼ 25 % smaller than for the
wafer trap. The stylus trap creates the weakest ion conﬁnement. The potential barrier
of the surface trap is comparable to those of the linear traps along the x-axis, but is
rather shallow along the y-axis. The secular frequencies determined along the x- and

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

6

Table 1. Trap depths and secular frequencies of ion traps in the absence of optical
cavities.

Ion trap

Blade trap
Wafer trap
Endcap trap
Stylus trap
Surface trap

Trap depth, eV
y-axis

x-axis

Secular frequency, MHz
y-axis

x-axis

2.62
3.54
1.77
0.03
2.08

6.06
6.06
0.66
0.005
0.23

1.23
1.32
0.53
0.05
2.43

1.23
1.32
1.06
0.10
2.44

y-axis are the same in the linear and the surface traps, indicating symmetrical shapes
of pseudopotentials around the trap center. In the endcap and stylus trap, however,
the secular frequencies along the y-axis are twice larger than the frequencies along the
x-axis.

Rescaling the trap geometry changes the trap depth and secular frequencies. When
all the dimensions, including the cavities, are rescaled linearly by a factor of a (for
example the electrodes separation of 1 mm changed to a mm), the trap depth and
secular frequencies change by a factor of 1/a2. According to this scaling law, even
though we have chosen particular dimensions for the traps, all the results in this article
can be rescaled approriately depending on practical design needs.

4. Distortion of the potentials by the cavity mirrors

The linear and endcap traps create trapping ﬁelds with rf minima located at the
symmetry axis or point deﬁned by the electrode conﬁgurations (see insets in ﬁgure 1(a)-
(c)). An ion is trapped on the central line (z-axis) in the linear traps and at the central
point between the electrodes in the endcap trap. On the other hand in the stylus and
surface traps, a trapped ion is located above the rf-electrodes (see insets in ﬁgure 1(d)
and (e)). For the chosen geometry the stylus trap creates an rf-null point positioned at
0.87 mm above the edge of the inner electrode and the surface trap creates an rf-null line
at a distance of 0.30 mm above the electrode surface. An advantage of these geometries
is a wide access angle for laser addressing to the trapped ions but they create relatively
shallow trapping potentials. In the linear and endcap traps, the position of the rf-null
is unaﬀected by the presence of the mirrors when the cavities are aligned symmetrically
around it. However, in the stylus and surface traps the rf-null is slightly shifted in the
vertical direction even by symmetrically placed dielectric mirrors. For the stylus trap
the rf-null is shifted by 30 µm and 120 µm upwards (away from the electrodes) when the
mirrors are aligned along the x- and y-axis directions respectively at a distance of 0.5
mm from the unperturbed rf-null. In the case of the surface trap, the rf-null is shifted
downwards by 15 µm when the mirrors are aligned along the x direction, and upwards
(towards the mirror) by either 2.6 µm or 2.9 µm when the mirrors are aligned along the

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

7

y or z direction, respectively.

To characterize the eﬀect of the cavity mirrors on the trapping potential we study
the relative changes of the trap depths and secular frequencies. Figure 3 shows changes
of the trap depths as a function of the cavity length for diﬀerent cavity alignments.
We have normalized the trap depths with the values obtained in simulations without
the optical cavities. The most notable result in ﬁgure 3 is that the eﬀect of the cavity
mirrors is reduced if the cavity axis coincides with the symmetry axis of the trapping
potential. The symmetry axes are along z- and y-axis for the linear and cylindrical traps
respectively. For the blade and wafer linear traps, there is no noticeable degradation
of the trap depth if the cavity axis is aligned along the z-axis. However, when the
cavities are aligned perpendicular to the z-axis, the trap depths drop below 50% of the
unperturbed case at cavity lengths comparable to the inter-electrode distance (∼ 1 mm).
Similarly, the trapping potential deformation is much smaller in the surface trap if the
cavity is aligned along the trap axis compared to a perpendicular alignment. Likewise
in the endcap trap, when aligned along the y-axis, the eﬀect of the cavity mirrors on the
relative trap depths is smaller compared to when the cavity is aligned along the x-axis.
Even though less pronounced, also in the stylus trap, the eﬀect of the dielectric mirrors
on the trapping ﬁeld is signiﬁcantly reduced if aligned along the symmetry axis (y-axis)
of the trap electrodes.

The reduced distortion of the trapping ﬁeld when the cavity axis coincides with the
trap’s symmetry axis can be easily understood by considering the behavior of the electric
ﬁeld on the mirror-vacuum interfaces. While the electric ﬁeld component parallel to the
surface of the dielectric is unaﬀected, the perpendicular component changes according
to the boundary condition E⊥
vacuum/dielectric. This leads to a deﬂection of the
electric ﬁeld on the surface unless the electric ﬁeld is either only perpendicular or parallel
to the surface. In the case where the cavity axis is aligned along the symmetry axis
of the trap, the electric ﬁeld created by the electrodes is predominately perpendicular
to the dielectric material of the mirrors. Thus, the deformation of the trapping ﬁeld is
minimum.

dielectric = E⊥

When the cavity alignment is perpendicular to the symmetry axis of the electrode
conﬁguration, the performance of the linear and endcap traps are very similar. Both
traps exhibit a change in the trap depth starting from about 3 mm cavity length
(potential change ≈ 5%). The stylus trap shows this deterioration at a similar distance
but the drop in the trap depth is more rapid and becomes as low as 25% at 2 mm in
contrast with the well above 50% for the linear and endcap traps. This makes it the
least robust ion trap when combined with dielectric cavities. Due to the open geometry,
the trapping ﬁeld extends further out from the trap center compared to the other traps
with closed structures. Therefore the overlap of the extending trapping ﬁeld with the
cavity mirrors is signiﬁcantly larger even at long cavity lengths.

Surprisingly, the surface trap suﬀers far less from its open structure than the stylus
trap. Even though both trap depths increase by adding the mirror above the electrode
plane, the detrimental eﬀect of the cavity when aligned perpendicular to the trap axis

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

8

Figure 3. Trap depths calculated for diﬀerent ion traps and diﬀerent optical cavity
orientations as a function of cavity length: (a) and (b) are the normalized trap depths
in the x- and y-axis directions of the linear traps. The wafer and blade traps behave
similarly and are thus represented by a single data set. The inset in (a) shows how the
trapping ﬁeld is deformed by the presence of the cavity in the blade trap at a cavity
length of 1 mm.
It can be seen that the trap depth is signiﬁcantly reduced in the
x-direction due to the intersection of the cavity with the potential. (c) and (d) are the
normalized trap depths in the x- and y-axis directions of the cylindrical traps.

is signiﬁcantly reduced in the surface trap. Even compared with the blade/wafer and
endcap traps, the eﬀect of the cavity on the trapping potential seems signiﬁcantly smaller
at cavity lengths greater than 1.5 mm . However, at short cavity lengths the disturbance
increases signiﬁcantly faster than for all the other traps. The reason for this is the close
distance between the ion and the electrodes (300 µm) which provides eﬀective shielding
from the inﬂuence of the dielectric.

To further examine the eﬀect of the dielectric mirrors on the trapping ﬁeld, we study
relative changes of the secular frequencies for diﬀerent traps and cavity alignments as
a function of the cavity length (see ﬁgure 4). The frequencies are normalized by the
values without the cavities as in ﬁgure 3. In all the conﬁgurations, except the endcap
trap with mirrors along the x-axis, the secular frequencies change by less than 10% at
cavity lengths down to 1 mm, in contrast to the much larger relative changes of the trap
depths discussed above.

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

9

Figure 4. Secular frequencies calculated for diﬀerent ion traps and diﬀerent optical
cavity orientations as a function of the caivty length: (a) and (b) are the normalized
secular frequencies in the (a) x- and (b) y-axis directions of the linear traps. The wafer
and blade traps behave very similarly and are thus represented by a single data set. (c)
and (d) are the normalized secular frequencies in the (c) x- and (d) y-axis directions
of the cylindrical traps.

5. Cavity misalignment

In section 4 we assumed that the cavity axis is perfectly aligned and the mirrors are
positioned symmetrically around the trap center.
In practice, however, this is not
necessarily the case and often a small misalignment is observed. To investigate the
eﬀect of cavity misalignment on the trapping potential we focus on one speciﬁc ion trap,
the linear blade trap. We have chosen this conﬁguration as there has been an earlier
experimental investigation of this eﬀect with this trap geometry [34]. We have tested
three possible cavity orientations (shown in Figure 2). For each cavity orientation, the
mirrors were shifted by 0.1 mm in three diﬀerent ways as illustrated in Figure 5 for a
cavity oriented along the x-axis: translational misalignment along (a) the longitudinal
and (b) transverse direction, and (c) skewed misalignment in the transverse direction.
Perturbations to the trapping potential were calculated with a cavity length of 1 mm.
When mirrors are aligned along the x- or y-axis and displaced along the cavity axis
(Figure 5(a)), the trapping potential becomes asymmetric and the trap depth is reduced.

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

10

Figure 5. Conﬁgurations of cavity misalignment and the trapping potentials.

The trap depth decreases by 20% for the cavity oriented along the x-axis and by 30%
for the cavity oriented along the y-axis. No reduction in the trap depth is observed with
any type of misalignment when the cavity is aligned along the z-axis.

Any asymmetric mirror misalignment breaks the trap symmetry and hence shifts
the location of a trapped ion. With a 1 mm-long cavity oriented along the x-axis, the
asymmetric mirror oﬀset of 0.1 mm in the x- and y-directions moves the ion position by
14 µm and 27 µm respectively from the unperturbed center in the direction opposite to
the mirror shifts (see Figure 5(a) and (b)). When the cavity is oriented vertically, the
ion position is shifted by 62 µm and 14 µm in the x- and y-directions for the mirror
oﬀsets in the corresponding directions. When the cavity is aligned along the z-axis,
the ion displacements in the x- and y-directions are only 4 µm and 6 µm respectively.
More insight on the trap distortion can be gained by looking at the way in which the
potential is deformed. Figure 5 shows the disturbed trapping potential for misaligned
cavities. The oﬀset of the cavity shifts the trap center towards the closest mirror. This
displacement changes with the position along the trap axis. This eﬀect is particularly
pronounced if the mirrors are oﬀset transversely to the cavity axis and in opposite
directions to each other (see Figure 5(c)). The resulting nodal line of the trapping ﬁeld
then exhibits a ﬁgure ’S’ shape which can lead to an axial rf ﬁeld component if the ion is
displaced from the nodal line. Even though the ion’s position can be adjusted in a way
that it resides on the nodal line, the axial ﬁeld components make it notoriously diﬃcult
to ﬁnd external static ﬁelds to ensure that the ions is placed on the ﬁeld’s nodal line.

In addition, we have analyzed the anharmonicity of the trapping potential along
the cavity axis for the case of Figure 5(a). For this, the potential is expanded in a Taylor
series

Φpseudo = Φ0 +

Cn · xn,

(2)

6(cid:88)

n=2

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

11

Figure 6. Anharmonicity of the trap potential due to a axial misalignment of the
cavity mirrors.

where Cn are the expansion coeﬃcients and Φ0 is an oﬀset. To ensure the expansion
around the potential minimum, the linear expansion coeﬃcient is forced to be zero.
The suitable ﬁtting range was determined by increasing the ﬁtting range from 10 µm
until the ﬁtting error is below 10−6 and the ﬁtting parameters are stabilized. This
procedure results in a ﬁtting range of 100 µm. To compare the ﬁtting parameters of the
Taylor expansion, we use the anharmonicity coeﬃcients deﬁned as a ratio between the
anharmonic terms and the quadratic ﬁtting parameter:

Cn · ln−2

0
C2

An =

.

(3)

The characteristic length scale l0 is the width of the ions thermal wavepacket at the
Doppler temperature in the trapping potential along the x-direction. Figure 6 shows
the anharmonicity coeﬃcients for a range of cavity lengths between 1 mm and 5 mm.
The characteristic length at the Doppler temperature of 590 µK changes from 75 nm to
64 nm in this cavity length range due to the change in secular frequency.

6. Eﬀect of surface charges

We also investigate the eﬀect of charges on the cavity mirrors on the trapping potential.
In ion trap systems, the presence of laser radiation for generating and cooling ions are
often in the UV region of the optical spectrum. Light scattering of these laser beams
can cause charging either through direct interaction with the dielectric material [23]
or through photo-electron emission which can accumulate on dielectric surfaces. While
other dielectric materials in the ion trap can be put either far away from the trap
center or shielded, this is not possible for the dielectric mirrors of short cavities. To
simulate the eﬀect of potential charging of the cavity mirrors, we calculate the electric
ﬁeld at the trap center generated by a constant surface charge of 10−6C/m2 on one of
the cavity mirrors while the other mirror is kept uncharged. This is because charging

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

12

Figure 7. Electric ﬁeld in the trap center generated by surface charges on one of the
cavity mirrors. (a) waver and blade trap design (b) endcap and stylus trap (c) surface
trap

both mirrors would, at least partially, cancel the eﬀect on the trapped ions. We have
simulated the static electric ﬁeld at the trap center generated by the surface charge in
the same conﬁguration as in section 3 (see Figure 3). The amplitudes of the simulated
ﬁelds are shown in ﬁgure 7. While the electric ﬁeld is almost independent of the cavity
orientation for the blade trap, in the wafer trap the close vicinity of the rf electrodes
to the cavity mirrors in the y-direction shields the charge and thus results in a reduced
ﬁeld at the trap center.
In the case of x- and z-oriented cavity, the generated ﬁelds
in the wafer trap are very similar to the blade trap. The endcap trap with a cavity
aligned along the y-axis shows the smallest electric ﬁeld due to the shielding of the
charge provided by the rf-electrodes. In contrast, the open structure of the stylus ion
trap shows reduced shielding and a higher electric ﬁeld in both cavity orientations. Very
similarly, the surface trap (Figure 7(c)) provides the least shielding to show the highest
static electric ﬁelds among all the tested geometries.

7. Mirror material

Finally, we investigate the eﬀect of the mirror material on trapping potential distortions
using the blade linear trap. For this we have simulated trapping ﬁelds for mirrors
with dielectric constants of  = 2.1 , 3.8 and 4.5 (typical range for silica glasses).
Figure 8 shows how the trap depth and secular frequency are aﬀected by the presence
of the mirrors. As expected, the trapping ﬁeld deformation is larger for higher dielectric
constants. For the dielectric constant of  = 3.8 we have also performed a simulation
with an additional 10 µm thick layer of a high dielectric constant ( = 15) material on
the mirror facets in order to emulate the high reﬂective mirror coatings. Due to the
small volume of this layer, the eﬀect is insigniﬁcant (compare the red and yellow traces
in Figure 8).

In order to avoid a build up of electric charges on the dielectric surfaces, conductive
layers may be deposited on the mirror surface. We have investigated the inﬂuence of
the conductivity of such a layer on the end facets of the mirror substrates by performing
a full rf trapping ﬁeld simulation, taking the time variation of the trapping ﬁeld into

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

13

Figure 8. (a) Trap depth and (b) secular frequencies calculated for the blade linear
trap with optical cavities with various mirror materials. The mirror materials include
an additional layer of a high dielectric constant and conductive coatings on the mirror
facets or on the entire substrates. Inset in (a) shows in the geometry of the ion trap.

account (see ﬁgure 8).The trap depth deteriorates rapidly with increasing conductivity
and saturates at high conductivities. The trap depth drops by more than 40% when
the conductivity increases from 0.01 S/m to 1 S/m but there is no signiﬁcant change
when the conductivity increases further. Figure 8 also contains a full rf simulation of
mirror substrates which are entirely covered by a grounded metal layer. Even though
this conﬁguration is the best to prevent charging of the mirror substrates it causes the
largest deterioration of the trapping potential.

8. Conclusion

We have investigated the eﬀect caused by the presence of a dielectric material on the
trapping ﬁeld in several diﬀerent rf ion trap designs and cavity alignments. As a measure
of the inﬂuence from the cavity mirrors, we have used the changes in the trap depth
and the secular frequencies. Considering the deformation of the trapping ﬁeld due to
the dielectric mirrors (section 4), the eﬀect on the stylus traps are considerably larger
in comparison with the other electrode conﬁgurations. In addition, the trapping ﬁeld
deformation is signiﬁcantly reduced if the cavity axis is aligned with the symmetry axis
of the electrode conﬁguration e.g. the trap axis for linear traps. Misalignment of the
cavity mirrors with respect to the mirror substrate axis (transverse misalignment) or
displacement of the cavity along its axis (longitudinal misalignment) results in a local
shift of the trap center (section 5). While these shifts still result in a ﬁeld-free nodal line,
the local deformation could lead to ion micro-motion along the trap axis. Even though
this can be compensated, it may constitute an experimental complication. Asymmetric
mirror positions also increase the anharmonicity of the trapping potential which can
be associated with increased heating and parametric trap instabilities at higher ion
temperatures. The presence of charges on the dielectric surfaces causes static electric

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

14

ﬁelds at the trap center which displace the ion from the rf-null point. Even though these
static ﬁelds can be compensated by applying appropriate voltages to axillary or the rf
electrodes, their ﬂuctuations can impair localisation of the ions in the trap. Therefore,
we have simulated the electric ﬁeld at the trap center caused by surface charges on the
mirrors (section 6). Similarly to the results in section 4, the residual static electric ﬁelds
in the trap center of a given surface charge is larger for open electrode structures. To
consider the eﬀects of the mirror materials, we have conducted simulations for a speciﬁc
trap geometry and cavity alignment (section 7). For dielectric materials, the trapping
ﬁeld deformation increases with increasing dielectric constant, an expected behaviour.
This eﬀect signiﬁcantly increases by increasing the mirror surface conductivity, for which
we have used a full rf simulation of the trapping ﬁeld.

Despite several eﬀorts, combining ion traps with optical cavities is still a signiﬁcant
challenge. Even though our simulations do not point towards a single speciﬁc eﬀect
which can explain the present diﬃculties in full, it clearly shows diﬀerences among
diﬀerent ion trap designs and mirror alignments in regards of the eﬀect caused by the
presence of the dielectric mirrors. Closed electrode structures, such as the blade/wafer
and endcap traps, with the cavity aligned along the symmetry axis of the electrode
geometry exhibit the least deformation of the trapping ﬁeld and the lowest eﬀect from
mirror charging.

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge support from EPSRC through the UK Quantum Technology
Hub: NQIT - Networked Quantum Information Technologies (EP/M013243/1) and
EP/J003670/1.

References

[1] C Monroe, D M Meekhof, B E King, W M Itano, and D J Wineland. Demonstration of a

fundamental quantum logic gate. Physical Review Letters, 75(25):4714–4717, 1995.

[2] Ferdinand Schmidt-Kaler, Hartmut H¨aﬀner, Mark Riebe, Stephan Gulde, Gavin P T Lancaster,
Thomas Deuschle, Christoph Becher, Christian F Roos, J¨urgen Eschner, and Rainer Blatt.
Realization of the Cirac-Zoller controlled-NOT quantum gate. Nature, 422(6930):408–11, 2003.
[3] Stephan Gulde, Mark Riebe, Gavin P T Lancaster, Christoph Becher, J¨urgen Eschner, Hartmut
Implementation of the

H¨aﬀner, Ferdinand Schmidt-Kaler, Isaac L Chuang, and Rainer Blatt.
Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm on an ion-trap quantum computer. Nature, 421(6918):48–50, 2003.

[4] D Leibfried, B DeMarco, V Meyer, D Lucas, M Barrett, J Britton, W M Itano, B Jelenkovic,
C Langer, T Rosenband, and D J Wineland. Experimental demonstration of a robust, high-
ﬁdelity geometric two ion-qubit phase gate. Nature, 422(6930):412–415, 2003.

[5] Jan Benhelm, Gerhard Kirchmair, Christian F. Roos, and Rainer Blatt. Towards fault-tolerant

quantum computing with trapped ions. Nature Physics, 4(6):463–466, 2008.

[6] T P Harty, D T C Allcock, C J Ballance, L Guidoni, H A Janacek, N M Linke, D N Stacey,
and D M Lucas. High-Fidelity Preparation, Gates, Memory, and Readout of a Trapped-Ion
Quantum Bit. Physical Review Letters, 113(22):220501, 2014.

[7] Thomas Monz, Philipp Schindler, Julio T. Barreiro, Michael Chwalla, Daniel Nigg, William A.

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

15

Coish, Maximilian Harlander, Wolfgang H¨ansel, Markus Hennrich, and Rainer Blatt. 14-Qubit
Entanglement: Creation and Coherence. Physical Review Letters, 106(13):130506, 2011.

[8] D Kielpinski, C Monroe, and D J Wineland. Architecture for a large-scale ion-trap quantum

computer. Nature, 417(6890):709–711, 2002.

[9] S. Seidelin, J. Chiaverini, R. Reichle, J. Bollinger, D. Leibfried, J. Britton, J. Wesenberg,
R. Blakestad, R. Epstein, D. Hume, W. Itano, J. Jost, C. Langer, R. Ozeri, N. Shiga, and
D. Wineland. Microfabricated Surface-Electrode Ion Trap for Scalable Quantum Information
Processing. Physical Review Letters, 96(25):253003, 2006.

[10] Jonathan P Home, David Hanneke, John D Jost, Jason M Amini, Dietrich Leibfried, and David J
Wineland. Complete methods set for scalable ion trap quantum information processing. Science,
325(5945):1227–30, 2009.

[11] D.A. Hite, Y. Colombe, A.C. Wilson, D.T.C. Allcock, D. Leibfried, D.J. Wineland, and D.P.

Pappas. Surface science for improved ion traps. MRS Bulletin, 38(10):826–833, 2013.

[12] R. Bowler, J. Gaebler, Y. Lin, T. R. Tan, D. Hanneke, J. D. Jost, J. P. Home, D. Leibfried, and
D. J. Wineland. Coherent diabatic ion transport and separation in a multizone trap array.
Physical Review Letters, 109(8):1–4, 2012.

[13] A. Walther, F. Ziesel, T. Ruster, S. T. Dawkins, K. Ott, M. Hettrich, K. Singer, F. Schmidt-Kaler,
and U. Poschinger. Controlling fast transport of cold trapped ions. Physical Review Letters,
109(8):1–5, 2012.

[14] T. Pellizzari, SA Gardiner, JI Cirac, and P. Zoller. Decoherence, continuous observation, and
quantum computing: A cavity QED model. Physical Review Letters, 75(21):3788–3791, 1995.
[15] J I Cirac, P. Zoller, H J Kimble, and H Mabuchi. Quantum state transfer and entanglement
distribution among distant nodes in a quantum network. Physical Review Letters, 78(16):3221–
3224, 1997.

[16] H J Kimble. The quantum internet. Nature, 453(7198):1023–30, 2008.
[17] G R Guth¨ohrlein, M Keller, K Hayasaka, W Lange, and H Walther. A single ion as a nanoscopic

probe of an optical ﬁeld. Nature, 414(6859):49–51, 2001.

[18] A. B. Mundt, A. Kreuter, C. Becher, D. Leibfried, J. Eschner, F. Schmidt-Kaler, and R. Blatt.
Coupling a Single Atomic Quantum Bit to a High Finesse Optical Cavity. Physical Review
Letters, 89(10):103001, 2002.

[19] M. Keller, B. Lange, K. Hayasaka, W. Lange, and H. Walther. Continuous generation of single
photons with controlled waveform in an ion-trap cavity system. Nature, 431:1075–1078, 2004.
[20] H G Barros, A Stute, T E Northup, C Russo, P O Schmidt, and R Blatt. Deterministic single-

photon source from a single ion. New Journal of Physics, 11(10):103004, 2009.

[21] A. Stute, B. Casabone, P. Schindler, T. Monz, P. O. Schmidt, B. Brandst¨atter, T. E. Northup, and
R. Blatt. Tunable ionphoton entanglement in an optical cavity. Nature, 485(7399):482–485,
2012.

[22] B. Casabone, A. Stute, K. Friebe, B. Brandst¨atter, K. Sch¨uppert, R. Blatt, and T. E.
Northup. Heralded Entanglement of Two Ions in an Optical Cavity. Physical Review Letters,
111(10):100505, 2013.

[23] M Harlander, M Brownnutt, W H¨ansel, R, and R Blatt. Trapped-ion probing of light-induced

charging eﬀects on dielectrics. New Journal of Physics, 12(9):093035, 2010.

[24] Peter F. Herskind, Aur´elien Dantan, Joan P. Marler, Magnus Albert, and Michael Drewsen.
Realization of collective strong coupling with ion Coulomb crystals in an optical cavity. Nature
Physics, 5(7):494–498, 2009.

[25] B Brandstatter, A McClung, K Schuppert, B Casabone, K Friebe, A Stute, P O Schmidt,
Integrated ﬁber-mirror ion trap for strong

C Deutsch, J Reichel, R Blatt, and T E Northup.
ion-cavity coupling. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 84(12):123104, 2013.

[26] Marko Cetina, Alexei Bylinskii, Leon Karpa, Dorian Gangloﬀ, Kristin M Beck, Yufei Ge, Matthias
Scholz, Andrew T Grier, Isaac Chuang, and Vladan Vuleti´c. One-dimensional array of ion chains
coupled to an optical cavity. New Journal of Physics, 15(5):053001, 2013.

Comparative numerical studies of ion traps with integrated optical cavities

16

[27] David DR Leibrandt, Jaroslaw Labaziewicz, Vladan Vuleti´c, and IL Isaac Chuang. Cavity

Sideband Cooling of a Single Trapped Ion. Physical Review Letters, 103(10):103001, 2009.

[28] J D Sterk, L Luo, T A Manning, P Maunz, and C Monroe. Photon collection from a trapped

ion-cavity system. Physical Review A, 85(6):062308, 2012.

[29] D Hunger, T Steinmetz, Y Colombe, C Deutsch, T W H¨ansch, and J Reichel. A ﬁber FabryPerot

cavity with high ﬁnesse. New Journal of Physics, 12(6):065038, 2010.

[30] Matthias Steiner, Hendrik M. Meyer, Christian Deutsch, Jakob Reichel, and Michael K¨ohl. Single

Ion Coupled to an Optical Fiber Cavity. Physical Review Letters, 110(4):043003, 2013.

[31] Hiroki Takahashi, Alex Wilson, Andrew Riley-watson, Fedja Oruˇcevi´c, Nicolas Seymour-Smith,
Matthias Keller, and Wolfgang Lange. An integrated ﬁber trap for single-ion photonics. New
Journal of Physics, 15(5):053011, 2013.

[32] E. Brama, A. Mortensen, M. Keller, and W. Lange. Heating rates in a thin ion trap for microcavity

experiments. Applied Physics B, 107:945–954, 2012.

[33] R. Maiwald, D. Leibfried, J.J. Britton, C. Bergquist, G. Leuchs, and D.J. Wineland. Stylus ion

trap for enhanced access and sensing. Nature Physics, 5:551, 2009.

[34] M. Keller. Quantuenoptik mit gespeicherten 40Ca+-Ionen. PhD thesis, Ludwig-Maximilians-

Universitaet Muenchen, 2004.

