6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
5
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Anomalous refraction of acoustic guided waves in solids with

geometrically tapered metasurfaces

Hongfei Zhu1 and Fabio Semperlotti1

2∗

,

1Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA

2 Ray W. Herrick Laboratories, School of Mechanical Engineering,

Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA

∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: fsemperl@purdue.edu

The concept of metasurface has recently opened new exciting directions to en-

gineer the refraction properties in both optical and acoustic media. Metasur-

faces are typically designed by assembling arrays of sub-wavelength anisotropic

scatterers able to mold incoming wavefronts in rather unconventional ways.

The concept of metasurface was pioneered in photonics and later extended

to acoustics while its application to the propagation of elastic waves in solids

is relatively unexplored. We investigate the design of acoustic metasurfaces

to control elastic guided waves in thin-walled structural elements. These en-

gineered discontinuities enable anomalous refraction of guided wave modes

consistently with the generalized Snell’s law. The metasurfaces are made out

of locally-resonant torus-like tapers enabling accurate phase shift of the in-

coming wave which ultimately affects the refraction properties. We show that

anomalous refraction can be achieved on transmitted antisymmetric modes

(A0) either when using a symmetric (S0) or antisymmetric (A0) incident wave,

the former clearly involving mode conversion. The same metasurface design

1

also allows achieving structure embedded planar focal lenses and phase masks

for non-paraxial propagation.

Introduction

The extensive development of engineered materials that has taken place during the last few

decades provided new and unconventional ways to manipulate optical and acoustic waves.

Beam forming and steering (1–4), lenses with super-resolution (5–8), and mechanical diodes

(9, 10) are only a few of the many capabilities enabled by this new class of materials. As new

applications for metamaterials are envisioned, a quest to reduce their size and develop sub-

wavelength modulation devices begun. The concept of metasurface has recently emerged as

a powerful approach to effectively manipulate wave-like ﬁelds while breaking the dependence

on the propagation length. Metasurfaces are typically made of planar ultra-thin (that is sub-

wavelength) gratings able to produce abrupt changes in the phase of the propagating waves.

A common approach to the design of these elements exploits arrays of scatterers having both

subwavelength separation and variable (either material or geometric) properties. The resulting

interfaces exhibit either a spatially variable phase or impedance that virtually allows molding

reﬂected and refracted wavefronts in any direction and shape. Compared to conventional optical

and acoustic devices, such metasurfaces achieve wavefront control over distances much smaller

than a wavelength.

Metasurfaces (11) were ﬁrst studied in optics and implemented via optical antennas (12,13)

or microwave metamaterials (14, 15) in the context of light propagation across phase discon-

tinuities. The Generalized Snell’s Law (GSL) was introduced in order to predict the anoma-

lous propagation across material interfaces characterized by a phase gradient (12). Inspired

by this pioneering work, optical devices able to achieve unconventional wavefront manipula-

tion capabilities have been theoretically and experimentally demonstrated. A few remarkable

2

examples concern bending light in arbitrary shapes (13,16), conversion of propagating into sur-

face modes (17), and the development of ultra-thin lenses (18, 19). Shortly after the introduc-

tion of metasurfaces in optics, the concept was adopted in acoustics with the intent of creating

subwavelength acoustic devices. To-date, the most notable design of an acoustic metasurface

is based on the labyrinthine, or space-coiling unit, which proved to be very effective for the

control of pressure waves in gases. These labyrinthine structures have shown fascinating prop-

erties (20–24) including negative and zero effective refractive indices. Anomalous reﬂection

and refraction have been both numerically (25, 26) and experimentally (27–31) demonstrated

with labyrinthine units based on phase discontinuities. For completeness, we note that acous-

tic metasurfaces based on impedance discontinuities (as opposed to phase discontinuities) have

also been theoretically demonstrated (32, 33).

Despite much progress in the development of these subwavelength designs in both optics

and acoustics, the extension of this concept to the control of elastic waves in solids has not re-

ceived much attention. Compared to acoustic waves in ﬂuids and gases, elastic waves in solids

exhibit a richer physics including the existence of different wave types and of mode conversion

effects. The ability to extend the concept of metasurface to a solid could provide novel and

important functionalities for structural acoustic waveguides while drastically expanding their

range of application. These new capabilities could provide an unprecedented level of control

on the path of energy propagation through a solid, ultimately enabling applications such as

subwavelength ultrasonic lenses for imaging and biomedical applications (e.g. ultrasonic mi-

croscopy beyond the diffraction limit and ultrasonic surgery).

In this article, we show both numerically and experimentally the possibility to success-

fully design acoustic metasurfaces fully embedded in structural waveguides and able to reliably

achieve anomalous refraction. The metasurface design is based on the use of geometric tapers

recently introduced by Zhu (34) in the context of thin-walled acoustic metamaterials. Previous

3

results have shown that a periodic lattice of these geometric inhomogeneities can provide a high

level of control of the spatial distribution of the propagation parameters due to the thickness-

related dispersion behavior. At the same time, this design drastically reduces the fabrication

complexity of traditional metamaterial systems based on a multi-material approach (35–37).

Acoustic metasurfaces based on geometric tapers

The proposed approach synthesizes the metasurface based on periodic arrays of elements whose

individual unit consists in a geometrically inhomogeneous cell combined with a resonating core.

In practice, each unit represents an anisotropic acoustic scatterer (Fig.1a). The scatterer consists

of a torus-like taper which supports a center (resonating) mass. By tuning the parameters of

the taper and of the mass in each individual unit, carefully engineered discontinuities can be

designed and embedded into the supporting waveguide. In particular, the distribution of the

units controls the spatial phase gradient along the metasurface and, ultimately, the refraction

characteristics. In the following, we show by numerical simulations that anomalous refraction

can be achieved on transmitted antisymmetric modes (e.g. A0) either when using a symmetric

(e.g. S0) or an antisymmetric (e.g. A0) incident wave; the former clearly involving mode

conversion effects. This approach is then used to synthesize two types of compact acoustic

devices such as (1) a ﬂat ultra-thin lens, and (2) a phase-mask for non-paraxial propagation.

In order to predict the characteristics of reﬂected and refracted waves when in presence

of inhomogeneous interfaces with phase gradients, we use the Generalized Snell’s Law (GSL)

(12). In the following, we concentrate on the refraction characteristics which are of greater

interest for the design of practical devices. According to the GSL, the direction of anomalous

refraction is related to the direction of the incident planar wavefront as follows:

4

sin(θt)

λt −

sin(θi)

λi

=

1
2π

dφ
dx

(1)

where θ indicates the angle of propagation, λ the wavelength, dφ/dx the spatial phase gradi-

ent, and the subscripts i and t the incident and transmitted components of the wave. Equation (1)

implies that the refracted beam can have an arbitrary direction, provided that a suitable constant

phase-gradient (dφ/dx) can be produced along the interface. In order to design metasurfaces

that can effectively steer the transmitted guided wave, it is necessary to achieve a spatial gra-

dient proﬁle able to cover the entire 2π phase range. This condition translates into constraints

on the frequency response of the different anisotropic scatterers. In particular, it requires that

every scatterer achieves a full 2π phase change while simultaneously maximizing the ampli-

tude of the transmitted wave (i.e. reducing the back-scattering). Mode conversion is one of

the most characteristic traits of acoustic wave propagation in solids as compared to ﬂuids or

gases. In the present study, we show the possibility to achieve anomalous refraction for the

A0 anti-symmetric transmitted mode by illuminating the metasurface with either a S0 or an A0

incident mode. We will discuss the design for the S0 excitation in detail while observing that

the operating mechanism and the design strategy apply similarly to the A0 mode.

Design and frequency response of the fundamental unit cell. The fundamental building

block of the metasurface (Fig.1a) is a square unit (side length L = 4cm) having an embedded

elliptic torus-like taper and a (resonating) center mass whose value can be tuned by controlling
its thickness. The x− z cross-section of a typical unit is presented in Fig.1b, where t is the posi-
tion of the axis of symmetry of the center mass, a and b are the semi-major and semi-minor axis

lengths of the elliptic torus, r is the outer radius of the torus and h is the thickness of the tunable

center mass. In principle, there are many structural parameters that can be controlled to achieve

speciﬁc amplitude and phase proﬁles. In this study, we mostly concentrated on the parameter

5

h, which affects more directly the local resonance of the building block design, combined with

different taper proﬁles. In order to evaluate the frequency response of the different units, we

numerically calculated the transmitted A0 mode resulting from an incident S0 plane wave im-

pinging normally on the metasurface. The phase and amplitude response were extracted from

displacement data collected in the far-ﬁeld. The frequency response characterization for each

unit was performed on individual 3D strip-like models with a single embedded unit and periodic

boundary conditions applied on the top and bottom boundaries, as shown in Fig.1c (top). For

the sake of clarity and to facilitate the comparison between different units, we selected a speciﬁc

frequency of actuation (f = 20.1 kHz) which was used throughout the numerical simulations.
This frequency corresponded to a wavelength of the S0 mode λS0 ≈ 27 cm ∼ 6.75L and of the
A0 mode λA0 ≈ 5.9 cm ∼ 1.5L for a 8mm thick aluminum plate as considered in the numerical
results.

In order to achieve phase shifts covering the entire 2π range when exciting the metasurface

with a S0 mode, we exploited mode conversion. The unit was excited by a S0 plane wave at

normal incidence traveling from left to right. Consider a pair of exactly identical tapered units,

a π phase shift difference in the transmitted and mode-converted A0 wave can be achieved if

the units orientation is mirrored with respect to the neutral plane (see Fig.1c). This mechanism

can be easily understood by observing that the out-of-plane displacement ﬁeld produced by the

transmitted A0 mode (anti-symmetric with respect to the neutral plane) must match the ﬁeld

produced by the incident S0 wave in order to satisfy the continuity condition. the direction. For

one pair of units, the mirroring operation is equivalent to imposing the continuity conditions

with an opposite sign, which leads in a straightforward way to a phase shift difference of π.

These design considerations are conﬁrmed by the ﬁnite element simulations presented in Fig.1c

(bottom) that show the out-of-plane displacement ﬁeld associated with the transmitted A0 mode

along the xz cross-section of the strip model. The results of the two models, corresponding to

6

Figure 1: Schematic of the (a) elliptic torus-like tapered unit and of (b) its xz plane cross-
section showing the main geometric parameters. (c) Full ﬁeld results illustrating the π phase
shift occurring on the transmitted (mode converted) A0 mode generated by a normally incident
S0 mode when the same taper geometry is mirrored about the neutral plane. (d) The phase shift
response of a single unit at f = 20.1 kHz as a function of the thickness of the center mass
(which results in a resonance frequency shift).

the same taper geometry with mirror symmetry, clearly conﬁrm the phase shift difference of π.

We note that, the use of the mirrored geometry allows reducing the design complexity because

the individual units are required to cover only a phase range of π, while the remaining (π) shift

can be obtained by a mirroring operation.

In addition, the phase shift obtained by varying the thickness h of the attached mass (up to

twice the plate thickness) already produces phase shifts largely in excess of π (Fig.1d). This

7

means that the operating frequency of an individual unit can be further reduced therefore im-

proving the subwavelength properties of the metasurface.

Figure 2: Phase, amplitude, and full ﬁeld response produced by different units excited at a
selected frequency f = 20.1 kHz. (a) Phase (blue dots) and amplitude (red dots) plots of the
frequency response as a function of the unit geometry. The data are collected in the far-ﬁeld
of the transmitted A0 (converted) mode when exciting the metasurface with a S0 plane wave
at normal incidence. The unit cross-sections in the inset of (a) correspond to the geometry
modeled in (b).
(b) Out-of-plane (z direction) displacement ﬁeld produced by the different
embedded units.

Following this design process, three pairs of basic units were selected. Figure 2a shows the

corresponding phase shift (blue dots) and amplitude (red dots) associated with the transmitted

and mode-converted A0 wave across each unit. Results indicate that the six discrete phase

shifts cover the entire phase range in steps of approximately π/3 between adjacent units. The

corresponding normalized amplitude for the transmitted converted A0 mode is also sufﬁciently

large with values ﬂuctuating around 0.43, which is a normalized amplitude with respect to the

incident S0 wave. To provide further evidence of the phase-shift performance of the different

units, the transmitted A0 wave ﬁeld is shown in Fig.2b. Each model provides the out-of-plane

displacement pattern Uz(x, y) at the neutral plane of the strip-like model. Results clearly show

a cumulative phase shift covering the whole 2π range.

8

Numerical and Experimental Results

In the following paragraphs, we explore the design of the embedded acoustic metasurface based

on various combinations of the fundamental tapered units and able to achieve different forms

of wave manipulation. In particular, we show the application of the metasurface to three phe-

nomena: anomalous refraction, ultra-thin planar focusing lenses, and non-paraxial propagation.

Note that, in the following numerical results the S0 mode is always plotted in terms of the

in-plane displacement ﬁeld (x-component) at the neutral plane while the A0 mode in terms of

out-of-plane displacements (z-component).

Anomalous Refraction. The fundamental characteristic of the metasurface design consists

in the ability to achieve anomalous refraction. To illustrate this phenomenon we assembled a

metasurface based on a one-dimensional periodic array of supercells. The individual supercell

was built using different units properly selected to achieve a prescribed spatial phase gradient.

The units were fully integrated in the host structure consisting in a 8mm thick aluminum plate,

as shown in Fig.3a. The expected refraction angle θt can be predicted according to the GSL as

θt = arcsin( λtsin(θi)

λi

+ λt
2π

dφ

dx ).

To illustrate the occurrence of the anomalous refraction effect through the embedded meta-

surface we selected the case of normal incidence, i.e., θi = 0. The metasurface had a total length

of 96 cm equal to 24L, where L is the in-plane dimension of the basic unit. The fundamental

supercell at the basis of the metasurface resulted from the assembly of units with different ge-

ometry. The three different conﬁgurations provided a phase shift of dφ = π/3, dφ = π/2,

dφ = 2π/3 along the interface. The metasurface was excited by a normally incident S0 Gaus-

sian beam. Figure 3b shows the full ﬁeld response of the S0 mode which does not undergo

refraction because the metasurface was designed to manipulate anti-symmetric modes. The

visible reduction in the wave amplitude (around 40%) across the metasurface is related to the

9

Figure 3: (a) Schematic of the thin plate with the embedded metasurface. A S0 Gaussian beam
with normal incidence was used as external excitation to excite the metasurface. (b) shows
the ordinary refraction behavior of the transmitted S0 mode; the visible reduction in the wave
amplitude is due to the energy transferred into the anti-symmetric mode.
(c)-(e) shows the
transmitted (mode-converted) A0 wave ﬁeld for three metasurfaces having constant but different
value of the spatial gradient. The resulting anomalous refraction is in excellent agreement with
the prediction from the GSL indicated by the superimposed black arrows.

portion of energy being converted into the A0 mode. Figure 3c-e show the transmitted A0 mode

for the different values of the phase gradient. The numerical results for every conﬁguration

agreement with the analytical predictions provided by GSL according to which θ(60◦)

show clear evidence of the anomalous refraction phenomenon. In addition, they are in excellent
≈ 14.5◦,
≈ 29.4◦. For better clarity, the analytical predictions are also su-
perimposed on the full wave ﬁeld results (black arrows in Fig. 3c-e). Only in the case of the

θ(90◦)
t

≈ 21.6◦ and θ(120◦)

t

t

strongest spatial gradient (Fig.3e), a visible portion of the incident beam was converted into a

second refracted beam. This can be explained by the existence of a critical value for the phase

discretization, that is the value of dφ between adjacent units. It can be shown that, beyond a

10

certain value of dφ (for a given metasurface conﬁguration in which the plate thickness h, the

frequency of excitation, and the size of the fundamental array dx are all kept constant; this con-

dition is satisﬁed in our simulations) two possible propagating wave solutions can be supported

dφn

2π

by the same metasurface conﬁguration. In fact, due to its wrap-around character, the phase shift
of the metasurface can be written as dφn = dφ ± 2nπ, where n is any integer. If the discretiza-
tion is sufﬁciently ﬁne (i.e. small dφ), only n = 0 can support a propagating wave solution
dx ≤ 1 from GSL. However, if dφ is larger than a critical value, both the
satisfying −1 ≤ λ
solution n = 0 and n = −1 are possible. Following these considerations, the refraction angle
dx = −79.5◦ which is
of the second refracted beam can be determined by θ′
in good agreement with the numerical simulation (see the dashed red arrow in Fig. 3e). In our
λ = 0.644π.
current conﬁguration, the critical value for dφ can be calculated as dφc = 2π − 2πdx
Aside from these additional considerations, results in Fig.3 clearly illustrate that strong anoma-

t = arcsin λ
2π

−4/3π

lous refraction is achievable on the A0-converted Lamb modes with the proposed metasurface

design.

Flat Focal Lens. Metasurfaces offer many possibilities to design planar and compact acoustic

devices with diverse functionalities. Flat acoustic focal lenses are another example of devices

achievable via geometrically tapered acoustic metasurfaces. To design such a ﬂat lens, a hyper-

bolic phase proﬁle must be programmed into the metasurface, as shown in Fig.4a. For a given

focal length f, the phase shift φ(y) proﬁle is provided by:

φ(y) = ~k · SP =

2π
λ

(pf 2 + y2 − f )

(2)

where ~k is the wave vector, SP is the distance to compensate for to achieve a hyperbolic

proﬁle, and f is the focal length (that is the distance OF ).

To show the capabilities of the metasurface, we designed a lens having a focal length f = 70

cm. The corresponding phase proﬁle needed to achieve this performance was obtained accord-

11

Figure 4: Design of a ﬂat focal lens based on the embedded metasurface concept. (a) shows the
continuous hyperbolic phase proﬁle (blue curves) and the corresponding discrete phase proﬁle
(red dots) effectively implemented in the metasurface. The inset illustrates schematically how
to synthesize the phase proﬁle: the black circular line is the desired equal-phase contour for the
transmitted A0 mode showing that at point P the phase shift needs to be compensated propor-
tionally to the distance SP . (b) The intensity distribution |A|2 of the transmitted A0 wave ﬁeld
after the ﬂat focal lens.(c) Cross section of the intensity proﬁle at y = 0 cm. The peak appears
at x ≈ 68cm that is in very good agreement with the target value. (d) Transverse cross section
of the intensity proﬁle at x = 68 cm.

ing to Eqn.2 and plotted in Fig.4a (blue curve). The metasurface relies on the use of discrete

units to create an interface having a spatially varying phase proﬁle, therefore the target hyper-

bolic phase proﬁle can only be approximated by discrete values. For the generic ith element
(which covers the section of the metasurface from (i − 1)L to iL), the phase shift is given by
φi = φ((i − 1/2)L). The corresponding discrete phase proﬁle (red dots) of the metasurface is

12

plotted in Fig.4a and the lens can be readily constructed by selecting units that match the re-

quested phase shift. Note that the lens was designed with the intent to use a normally incident S0

excitation and to achieve a focal point in the transmitted A0 (converted) mode. Figure 4b shows
the spatial distribution of the intensity of the transmitted wave ﬁeld |A|2 after the metasurface.
To quantify the performance of the acoustic lens, the parallel cross-section intensity distribution

at y = 0 cm (indicated by the white parallel dashed line in Fig.4b) is shown in Fig.4c. The peak
occurs at x ≈ 68cm that is within a 3 % error from the target location (f = 70cm). The intensity
distribution along the transverse cross section at x = 68 cm is also plotted in Fig.4d in order to

show the very narrow focal point achievable with our metasurface concept.

Design of a phase mask for non-paraxial propagation. Geometrically tapered embedded

metasurfaces are very versatile and can enable, among the possible applications, the design of

phase masks (essentially acoustic analog ﬁlters) to generate self accelerating acoustic beams

that propagate along an arbitrary convex trajectory; a mechanism also known as non-paraxial

propagation.

In particular, we design the metasurface to perform as a phase mask able to convert an in-

cident wave into a non-paraxial beam. Based on the caustic theory (38–40), the continuous

spatial phase proﬁle along the metasurface can be synthesized in order to achieve an arbitrary

convex trajectory of the transmitted acoustic beam. Once the continuous phase proﬁle is avail-

able, its discrete approximation can be easily obtained by selecting basic unit cells according to

an analogous procedure to that described for the ﬂat lens.

The ability of the metasurface to generate non-paraxial beam propagation is numerically

shown in the following by means of two different examples: (1) a half circular and (2) a

parabolic trajectory. The half circular path with radius r and centered at (r, 0) is described
by the equation y = f (x) = pr2 − (r − x)2. The desired phase proﬁle is φ(y0) = −k0 ∗

13

(y0 − 2r ∗ arctan(y0/r)). Concerning the parabolic trajectory y = f (x) = a ∗ √x, the desired
2 + (a2/4)2))∗ a2/4. For the numerical example,
phase proﬁle is φ(y0) = −k0∗ (− ln(y0 + py0
the parameters r and a controlling the curvatures of the paths were selected as r = 0.2m and
a = √0.32, in order to guarantee the smoothness of the discrete phase proﬁle. The resulting
metasurfaces were embedded in the host 8mm thick plate and excited by an incident S0 plane

wave. The numerical results are provided in Fig.5a and b in terms of full displacement ﬁelds

associated with the transmitted (mode-converted ) A0 wave. The superimposed white solid

lines represent the target convex trajectories. In both cases, results show a very good agreement

between the targeted and the calculated trajectories. Clearly the circular trajectory exhibits a

larger error in the far quarter of the path due to the ﬁnite length of the metasurface.

Figure 5: Non-paraxial self bending acoustic beam achievable by a metasurface phase mask.
The metasurface, embedded into a 8mm thick plate, was designed to achieve a predeﬁned phase
proﬁle yielding an arbitrary convex trajectory. A normally incident S0 plane wave was used to
excite the metasurface. Both designs can successfully achieve non-paraxial self-accelerating
beams on the transmitted A0 mode as shown in (a) for a half circular trajectory path and in (b)
for a parabolic trajectory. The white solid lines in each plot represent the target trajectory.

Achieving anomalous refraction on the transmitted A0 waves without mode conversion.

The approach described above exploited the mode conversion mechanism, therefore the anoma-

14

lously refracted wave had different polarization with respect to the incident one. The use of

mode conversion allowed reducing the design complexity needed to achieve the 2π phase shift,

however it was not strictly necessary to successfully build the metasurface. In the following, we

show that embedded acoustic metasurfaces can also achieve anomalous refraction of transmitted

A0 waves when using an A0 incident wave, that is without exploiting mode conversion.

The design strategy follows the same approach illustrated above with the only exception

that the incident wave is an A0 mode and that the units phase shift must cover the whole 2π

range, therefore the mirror symmetry cannot be leveraged. In this scenario, the design consists

of an array of torus-like tapers with four different units that cover the 2π range phase shift in

steps of π/2 (Fig.6a). The array is periodically repeated to form the metasurface and embedded

into the host aluminum plate. To evaluate the performance, the metasurface was excited by

an A0 Gaussian beam with normal incidence. The high-amplitude beam in the area after the

metasurface (Fig.6b) is well consistent with the anomalously refracted beam predicted by the

GSL (represented by the black arrow superimposed on the full wave simulation results). A

secondary low-amplitude beam indicated by the red arrow is also generated. This beam is likely

due to a higher order of diffraction due to the supercell periodicity, explainable according to the

diffraction grating theory (41). In a similar way to what shown for the mode-conversion-based

design, planar acoustic devices can also be developed. As an example, we show a ﬂat focusing
lens design whose ﬁeld intensity distribution |A|2 after the metasurface lens is presented in
Fig.6c. Results clearly show the formation of a high intensity focal point when the metasurface

is illuminated by an A0 plane wave.

Experimental Validation.
In order to validate the concept of geometrically tailored acoustic
metasurface, we performed an experimental investigation targeted to the A0 − A0 actuation
mode. We selected this operating condition due to the simplicity of measuring the out-of-plane

15

Figure 6: Metasurface design for an operating mode not involving mode-conversion. The meta-
surface is illuminated by an A0 mode at normal incidence while the transmitted anomalously
refracted beam maintains the same polarization. (a) detailed view of the geometry selected for
the metasurface, (b) anomalous refraction of the transmitted A0 mode, and (c) intensity distri-
bution of a ﬂat focal lens.

component of the vibration ﬁeld and also because the A0 is one of the most signiﬁcant mode

in thin-walled waveguides. The experimental set-up consists in a thin ﬂat aluminum plate with

a single embedded metasurface. In order to rescale the frequency of the A0 mode in a range

convenient for excitation and measurement, the plate thickness was reduced to 4mm and the
basic unit size to 2cm × 2cm. The target operating frequency for this design was set to 50.1
kHz.

Numerical simulations equivalent to those illustrated above allowed selecting the metasur-

face conﬁguration used for fabrication. The conﬁguration consisted of three cells providing a

phase increment of 2π

3 between adjacent units. We highlight that this coarse discretization of
the phase gradient was selected to simplify the experimental setup and the corresponding fab-

rication, and also to bring the resonance frequencies in a range convenient for measurement.

Figure 7a shows a view of the embedded metasurface assembled by repeating periodically the

fundamental three-unit array as well as the detailed view of the array. The torus-like tapers were

CNC machined into an initially ﬂat plate while the center masses were fabricated separately and

successively glued onto the taper.

The experimental sample was mounted in an aluminum frame to facilitate the measure-

16

Figure 7: Experimental setup and results. (a) side view of the embedded metasurface on a
4mm thick aluminum plate. The zoom-in view shows the three unit supercell from which the
periodic array is assembled. (b) Front-view of the setup showing the plate mounted in a sup-
porting frame which provides clamped-free boundary conditions. The actuation was provided
by four Micro Fiber Composite (MFC) patches glued on the surface of the panel and simulta-
neously actuated to generate an A0 (quasi) plane wave. The white dashed box shows the area
where measurements were collected via a Scanning Laser Vibrometer. (c) numerical results
showing the predicted refracted beam for the selected conﬁguration. (d) full ﬁeld experimental
measurement acquired on the test setup.

ments. The frame provided clamped-free boundary conditions on the edges of the plate. A 3M

viscoelastic tape was used all around the panel to minimize the effect of boundary reﬂections.

An array of four Micro Fiber Composite (MFC) patches was surface bonded on the plate and

simultaneously actuated to generate an A0 (quasi) planar incident wave. The MFC driving sig-

17

nal was a 50-count burst with a 50kHz center frequency. The out-of-plane response of the plate

was acquired by using a Polytec PSV-500 laser scanning vibrometer.

Numerical simulations (Fig.7c) were also conducted on the same conﬁguration used for the

experiments in order to obtain a prediction of the refracted beam. These results predicted an

angle of refraction equal to 24.1◦. Figure 7d shows the experimental measurement of the entire

wave ﬁeld in the area following the metasurface (white dashed box in Fig.7b) at a given time

instant. The metasurface is able to generate an anomalous refracted beam at an angle 21.2◦. The

numerical and experimental results (Fig.7c-d) are in very good agreement therefore proving the

validity of the proposed design approach and the feasibility of using geometric tapers to create

structure-embedded metasurfaces.

Conclusions

We have presented and experimentally demonstrated a possible approach to the design of structure-

embedded acoustic metasurfaces which can produce a variety of unconventional wave manipu-

lation effects in structural waveguides. The geometrically tailored unit at the basis of the design

proved to be very efﬁcient, easy to tune, and able to yield compact metasurfaces for a variety of

functionalities. The tapers are extremely easy to fabricate and eliminate completely the need for

multi-material interfaces typical of the more traditional acoustic metamaterial design. This is a

critical aspect to achieve scalability and to transfer metamaterial concepts to structural members

with load-bearing capabilities.

Numerical and experimental results were in excellent agreement showing the robustness of

the approach and the high level of performance achievable with tapered design. Acoustic wave

control was shown for both same-mode and mode-converted transmitted waves. Applications

of the metasurface to acoustic planar focal lenses and phase-masks for non-paraxial propaga-

tion were also successfully investigated by numerical simulations and showed an outstanding

18

potential for wave control and device fabrication.

References and Notes

1. Z. Liu, et al., Science 289, 1734 (2000).

2. S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopoulos, H. A. Haus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 960 (1998).

3. S. Fan, et al., Phys. Rev. B 59, 15882 (1999).

4. Y. Pennec, et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 87 (2005).

5. A. Salandrino, N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. B 74, 075103 (2006).

6. Z. Liu, H. Lee, Y. Xiong, C. Sun, X. Zhang, Science 315, 1686 (2007).

7. J. de Rosny, M. Fink, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 124301 (2002).

8. A. Sukhovich, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 154301 (2009).

9. F. Li, P. Anzel, J. Yang, P. G. Kevrekidis, C. Daraio, Nat. Comm. 5, 5311 (2014).

10. N. Boechler, G. Theocharis, C. Daraio, Nat. Mat. 10, 665 (2011).

11. N. Yu, F. Capasso, Nat. Mater. 13, 139 (2014).

12. N. Yu, et al., Science 334, 333 (2011).

13. X. Ni, N. K. Emani, A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva, V. M. Shalaev, Science 335, 427 (2012).

14. N. K. Grady, et al., Science 340, 1304 (2013).

15. C. Pfeiffer, A. Grbic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 197401 (2013).

16. L. Huang, et al., Nano. Lett. 12, 5750 (2012).

19

17. S. Sun, et al., Nat. Mater. 11, 426 (2012).

18. F. Aieta, et al., Nano. Lett. 12, 4932 (2012).

19. M. Kang, T. Feng, H.-T. Wang, J. Li, Opt. Express 20, 15882 (2012).

20. Z. Liang, J. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 114301 (2012).

21. Y. Li, et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 101 (2012).

22. Z. Liang, et al., Sci. Rep. 3 (2013).

23. Y. Xie, B.-I. Popa, L. Zigoneanu, S. A. Cummer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 175501 (2013).

24. T. Frenzel, et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 (2013).

25. J. Mei, Y. Wu, New. J. Phys. 16, 123007 (2014).

26. Y. Li, B. Liang, Z. Gu, X. Zou, J. Cheng, Sci. Rep. 3 (2013).

27. Y. Li, et al., Phys. Rev. Applied 2, 064002 (2014).

28. Y. Xie, et al., Nat. Comm. 5 (2014).

29. K. Tang, et al., Sci. Rep. 4 (2014).

30. Y. Zhu, et al., Sci. Rep. 5 (2015).

31. B. Yuan, Y. Cheng, X. Liu, Appl. Phys. Express. 8 (2015).

32. J. Zhao, B. Li, Z. Chen, C. W. Qiu, Sci. Rep. 3 (2013).

33. J. Zhao, B. Li, Z. N. Chen, C.-W. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 (2013).

34. H. Zhu, F. Semperlotti, Phys. Rev. B 91, 104304 (2015).

20

35. Y. Wu, Y. Lai, Z.-Q. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 105506 (2011).

36. Y. Lai, Y. Wu, P. Sheng, Z.-Q. Zhang, Nat. Mat. 10, 620 (2011).

37. X. N. Liu, G. K. Hu, G. L. Huang, C. T. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98 (2011).

38. E. Greenﬁeld, M. Segev, W. Walasik, O. Raz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 213902 (2011).

39. S. Zhao, et al., Sci. Rep. 4 (2014).

40. L. Froehly, et al., Opt. Express 19, 16455 (2011).

41. S. Larouche, D. R. Smith, Opt. Lett. 37, 2391 (2012).

21

