IDENTICAL PARTICLES IN QUANTUM MECHANICS: OPERATIONAL AND

TOPOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
2
8
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

by

Klil H. Neori

Submitted to the University at Albany, State University of New York

A Dissertation

in Partial Fulﬁllment of

the Requirements for the Degree of

Doctor of Philosophy

College of Arts & Sciences

Department of Physics

2015

ABSTRACT

This dissertation reports our investigation into the existence of anyons, which interpolate between
bosons and fermions, in light of the Symmetrization Postulate, which states that only the two
extremes exist. The Symmetrization Postulate can be understood as asserting that there are only
two consistent ways of combining the behavior of distinguishable particles to obtain the behavior of
identical ones. We showed that anyonic behavior then arises because of the way in which the prob-
ability amplitudes of distinguishable particles in two dimensions are aﬀected by the topology of the
space. These can then be combined in one of the ways arising from the Symmetrization Postulate,
to form identical anyons. Therefore, anyons do not invalidate the Symmetrization Postulate, but
are entirely compatible with it. In order to show that anyons can arise without particle identity,
we investigated how distinguishable particles can gain particular properties from the topology of
their conﬁguration space. We managed to do so, and in the process, discovered a novel approach
for quantizing multiply-connected spaces, in a way that is more suited to anyons than the standard
approach.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

A doctorate is much like an apprenticeship, and must be lead by a good master. Philip Goyal
encouaged me to apply to UAlbany, and has been an inexhaustible source of ideas and critiques,
even before I ﬁnally committed to pursue my dissertation with him. I owe most of the rigor of
this work to his keen eye for detail, and all of my novelty to the creative tension which we enjoyed
through the years.

I would never have met Philip, nor come to UAlbany, had Avshalom C. Elitzur and Daniel
Rohrlich not helped me get back into Physics. Since coming to Albany, I have spent many hours
discussing ideas with Ariel Caticha and Oleg Lunin in person, and with Larry Schulman and John
Skilling via email. Marco Varisco provided feedback for the groupoid work at a crucial moment,
and Ronnie Brown and Peter A. Horv´athy contacted us unsolicited to provide further advice and
context for it, which was very encouraging.

There is a phrase in Hebrew: without bread, there is no Torah. The Physics Department
provided me with teaching assistantships for most of my tenure, and Philip provided me with
research assistantships, both with his startup funds and through a grant from the John Templeton
Foundation∗. The GSA provided a stipend for my work as Lead Senator. Travel and conference
support came from the Department, from the John Templeton Foundation, and from the Jaynes
Foundation at Boise State University. Finally, I was honored to have been chosen to receive the 2012
Mr. & Mrs. Masood Alam Comprehensive Exam Award and the 2015 Akira Inomata Excellence
in Research Award.

Good staﬀ is vital for any academic endeavor. Paul Labate, David Liguori, and the indispensable
Leslie Saint Vil kept the money and information ﬂowing, the oﬃce and class-space allocated, and
the technology functioning. Librarians and their assistants provided electronic and physical copies
of essential source materials, vital for foundations work.

I wish to thank my fellow graduate students, both at the Physics Department and through the
GSA. I could count on any of them for moral support, comfort, and stress-relief. I would not be
where I am without them.

Finally, my generous and long-suﬀering family. My parents, who have supported me emotionally
and ﬁnancially from birth, and encouraged me relentlessly on this journey, and my siblings, who
persist in their aﬀection despite my rarely punctuated absence in the last ﬁve years.

∗“Quantifying Relations as a Foundation for Physics”, Grant ID 24435.

iii

PREFACE

The following is a PhD dissertation, reporting research carried out by Klil H. Neori under the
supervision of Philip Goyal, at the University at Albany, SUNY, from from the summer of 2011 to
the fall of 2015. The research topic was identical particles in quantum mechanics. A short overview
of the entire project was presented as “From Operational Identical Particles to Distinguishable
Anyons and Back Again” at PASCAL 2015†.

In Chapter 1 we provide an introduction to the conceptual and topological background needed
for placing our main results in context. First we present the more traditional approach to identical
particles, where quantization precedes symmetrization. The restriction to bosons and fermions
was eventually recognized to require a Symmetrization Postulate. Section 2.5, in particular, refers
to an operational proof of this postulate published in Goyal [1]. Preliminary results focusing on
the non-interacting, two-particle case were presented as “On the Origin of the Quantum Rules
for Identical Particles” at QTRF-6‡ and MaxEnt 2012§, and published in the proceedings of the
latter as Neori and Goyal [2]. As explained in Ref. [1], this result concerns the combination of
distinguishable-particle transition amplitudes into those of identical particles, which is important
for the application to anyons.

The reduced conﬁguration space approach to identical particles attempts to derive the Sym-
metrization Postulate by considering particles to be identical before quantization, and then using
topological tools to restrict their behavior, rather than identity being imposed as a symmetry after
quantization [3–5]. This approach leads to additional possibilities, called anyons, in two dimen-
sions. Using the operational understanding of the Symmetrization Postulate, we show that anyonic
behavior is solely due to topology, rather than particle identicality. An overview of these results was
presented as “Anyons in the Operational Formalism” at MaxEnt 2014¶, published in its proceed-
ings as Neori and Goyal [6]. The derivation of quantization in multiply-connected spaces using the
fundamental groupoid, taken up in Chapter 3, was submitted for publication as Neori and Goyal
[7]. This is followed by an explicit formation of distinguishable anyons, and their combination into
identical anyons, in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 closes the novel contributions of this dissertation with
a discussion of the historical and philosophical implications of the work. The latter two chapters
comprise the contents of Neori and Goyal [8], which is in draft form.

†Physics All-Student Conference at Albany 2015, March 7, 2015, University at Albany, SUNY, Albany, New York.
‡Quantum Theory: Reconsideration of Foundations - 6, June 11-14, 2012, Linnaeus University, V¨axj¨o, Sweden.
§32nd International Workshop on Bayesian Inference and Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering,

July 15-20, 2012, MPP, Garching near Munich, Germany.

¶34th International Workshop on Bayesian Inference and Maximum Entropy Methods in Science and Engineering

September 21-26, 2014, Clos Luc´e, Amboise, France.

iv

CONTENTS

Abstract

Acknowledgments

Preface

Contents

List of Figures

1 Introduction

ii

iii

iv

v

vii

1

2 Detailed Background on Identical Particles

4
4
2.1 The Strangeness of Quantum Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2 Reconstructing Quantum Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3 Schr¨odinger vs. Feynman Rules in Quantum Mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4 The Operational Approach to Quantum Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5 Behavior of Identical Particles in Quantum Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6 The Reduced Conﬁguration Space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7 The Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect and Anyons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.8 The Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.9 Homotopy and the Fundamental Groupoid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

3 Quantization in Multiply-Connected Spaces

20
3.1 Motivation and Relation to Homotopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2 A Direct Path to the Fundamental Groupoid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

4 Distinguishable and Identical Anyons

4.1 Distinguishable Anyons
4.2 Applying the Operational Results to Anyons
4.3 Exchanging Identical Anyons

31
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3.1 Circular Exchanges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3.2 More General Paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4 One Dimension Without Incidence Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.5 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

5 Historical and Philosophical Discussion of Particle Identity

6 Conclusion

Appendix: Groupoid Source and Target Proof

42

45

46

v

Bibliography

48

vi

LIST OF FIGURES

2.1 Hall eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2 Aharonov-Bohm setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3 Aharonov-Bohm using Schr¨odinger approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4 Aharonov-Bohm using path-integral approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5 Homotopic paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.6 Non-homotopic paths
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.7 Associativity of concatenation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.8 Path reversal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.9 Loop concatenation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

3.1 Mesh transforms loops into paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2 Counter-clockwise circle broken into two half-circles
3.3 Mesh for fundamental groupoid representation with rotational symmetry.
. . . . . . . . 28
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.4 Mesh takes a non-crossing half-circle into a contractible loop.
3.5 Mesh takes a crossing half-circle into a loop with winding number 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . 30

4.1 Absolute to center of mass and relative coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2 Both half-circle counter-clockwise exchanges result in the same phase . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3 Two distinguishable transitions for same identical transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4 Transposing reverses relative coordinate, center of mass unchanged . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.5 Resolving ambiguity for identical particles in relative space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.6 Direct and opposite transitions for small angular change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.7 Accumulation of direct amplitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.8 Accumulation of direct amplitudes, counter-clockwise exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

5.1 Covering space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

vii

chapter 1

INTRODUCTION

Elementary particles are usually assumed to belong to one of two classes: bosons, which are limited
to symmetric multiple-particle wave-functions; and fermions, which are limited to anti-symmetric
multiple-particle wave-functions.

Initial works in the new quantum mechanics did not venture beyond fermions and bosons [9, 10].
However, it was soon noted that there is more to be said about the subject. Wigner [11, 12] was
the ﬁrst to explore other possibilities. He treated particle exchanges as generators of the symmetric
group SN of all permutations over N particles, and used group representation theory to perform
a more general analysis. He found that, indeed, for two particles only bosons and fermions are
possible, but even three particles [11] make the situation more complicated: while bosons and
fermions emerge as one-dimensional representations of SN , there are two more two-dimensional
representations, which might correspond to a diﬀerent type of particle. Pauli [13] provided a similar
development, and considered the fact that these other options do not come about to be a mystery yet
to be resolved. Dirac [14] similarly used group representation theory to treat identical particles, but
never actually developed even proto-paraparticles. While he acknowledged that other possibilities
are mathematically possible, he noted that only bosons and fermions were so far needed to explain
natural phenomena.

For a few decades, only a limited number of ad hoc attempts to push beyond these two possibil-
ities were published. Gentile [15] posited identical particle types allowing for an arbitrary number d
in each single-particle state. However, this formulation depends on the choice of basis, so it was
not pursued further. Green [16] made a similar extension in quantum ﬁeld theory, but this, again,
was somewhat ad hoc and did not immediately lead to further developments.

The issue was only seriously and rigorously taken up in the 1960s. At ﬁrst, several authors at-
tempted to prove that there are only two types of identical particles, using the basic rules of quantum
mechanics combined with the assumption that the particles are indistinguishable [17–20]. However,
Messiah and Greenberg [21] responded by showing that this was not a direct consequence of particle
indistinguishability. Instead, limiting the situation to bosons and fermions requires an additional
assumption, which they termed the Symmetrization Postulate. In the context of non-relativistic
quantum mechanics, they proposed to call particles which, as anticipated by Refs. [11–13], live in
multi-dimensional representations of the symmetric group, paraparticles. They then showed how
diﬃcult it would be to test for this kind of behavior with most common experiments, while sug-
gesting new ones which would nevertheless allow deviations to be detected. The impetus for this
investigation was the introduction by Greenberg [22] of the idea that quarks are paraparticles:
speciﬁcally, that they live a two-dimensional irreducible representation of S3, which helps explain
how they are able to share a ground state in nucleons, even though they otherwise share properties
with fermions. Greenberg [23] later argued that this was an important step on the way to the
ultimate resolution of this conundrum, namely, the introduction of color as an additional internal
degree of freedom for quarks [24]. This direction continued to be explored and extended into a
ﬁeld-theoretical generalization called quons [25].

In addition to these extensions, attempts to prove the Symmetrization Postulate, or at least to
break it down to less blatant subsidiary assumptions, continued. One notable example is Tikochin-
sky [26]. This work proved the Symmetrization Postulate for non-interacting particles by working
from the Feynman rules for transition amplitudes [27]. We were able to improve upon the rigor

1

of that result by starting from the operational approach to reconstructing the Feynman rules de-
veloped in Goyal et al. [28]. We published preliminary results, for two non-interacting particles,
in Neori and Goyal [2]. A generalization to N interacting particles can be found in Goyal [1].

An important alternative attempt at proving the Symmetrization Postulate, which takes an
entirely diﬀerent tack, creates a challenge for the operational approach. A common feature of the
non-relativistic approaches described so far is that they start from particles which are labeled, and
whose exchange is then treated as a physical process, akin to rotation or translation. Particle iden-
tity is then imposed, just like spherical symmetry or space homogeneity. Dirac [14] is particularly
explicit about this point. However, as was most clearly expressed by Mirman [29], if particles are
identical, then there is no physical meaning to their labels, nor to the exchange thereof. Conse-
quently, there is no reason to assume the existence of unitary symmetry operators corresponding
to particle label permutations. One way to resolve this is by treating exchanges as the end results
of paths undertaken by particles. That is, the particles start out in a certain state, move through
their conﬁguration space, and then end up in an end-state which diﬀers from their initial state only
by a permutation of the particles. Particle identity can then be expressed by taking this classical
conﬁguration space and identifying points which only diﬀer by such a permutation. The resulting,
reduced conﬁguration space, can now be quantized. The hope is that then the Symmetrization
Postulate can be proven as resulting from quantization over this space. This reduced conﬁguration
space approach was popularized by Leinaas and Myrheim [5], although it was preceded by Souriau
[3] and Laidlaw and DeWitt-Morette [4].

In the reduced conﬁguration space, exchange paths correspond to certain types of paths starting
and ending at the same point, that is, to loops. The degree of freedom which allows for bosons and
fermions now comes from the fact that there are several types of paths, called homotopy classes.
Each class consists of all paths which can be continuously deformed to one another without changing
the end points. If we restrict ourselves to loops, paths starting and ending at the same point, then
we have a group structure called the fundamental group, which is an algebraic topological property
of the space. The representations of this group are what corresponds to statistics in the label-based
formalism. Unlike there, the possible statistics depend on the dimension of the space in which the
particles dwell.

All three of the original works [3–5] came to the same conclusions about identical particles in
three dimensions. As long as particle incidence points are removed, the fundamental group is simply
the symmetric group, meaning that there are two one-dimensional representations, corresponding to
bosons and fermions. However, Ref. [5] found that in two dimensions or less, there is a whole family
of particle types interpolating between bosons and fermions. Wilczek [30] coined the term anyons to
describe this new range of possibilities in two dimensions. When anyons are exchanged, their wave-
function accrues a certain complex amplitude, which depends on the particular loop of exchange,
and is of the form eikϕ, where eiϕ is the generator of the statistics of the anyons in question, in
analogy to the ±1 accrued by exchanged bosons and fermions, respectively1.
On the surface, this could be considered as simply a failure to prove the Symmetrization Pos-
tulate. However, anyonic behavior is not just theoretical: the Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect,
which occurs in thin layers in condensed matter [32–36], results in excitations which have anyonic
statistics [37, 38]. Therefore, any attempt to deal with identical particles must provide for this
kind of behavior in two dimensions. This, however, does not mean that anyonic behavior necessar-
ily requires identical particles. As was noted by Goldin et al. [39], even distinguishable particles
may have topological exchange amplitudes, as it is the multiple-connectedness of the conﬁguration

1Girardeau [31] did anticipate the importance of topology as early as 1965, but only treated connectivity issues.

He focused on the contrast between one- and three-dimensional spaces, skipping over two.

2

space that creates them, and that happens in two dimensions as soon as the coincidence points are
removed. It is very common to generate the topological amplitudes through the use of non-local
interaction [40–42].

Nevertheless, the references to [5] have imbued anyons with identicality, and connected them
to the Symmetrization Postulate. An overwhelming portion of the literature about anyons, such
as Refs. [30, 43–46], takes reducing the conﬁguration space as their starting point (Ref. [30] resorts
to it in implying complications in generalization for more than two particles, even though the author
does not need this for two particles).

Now that we have provided a general motivational overview, we will dive into individual issues
that build up the understanding necessary for appreciating the novel results reported herein (Chap-
ter 2). We will explore the strangeness of quantum mechanics (Section 2.1), and the reconstruction
eﬀorts it motivated (Section 2.2). We will then study the relation between the Schr¨odinger and
Feynman formalisms (Section 2.3), followed by the operational reconstruction which uses the lat-
ter (Section 2.4), and its application to the issue of identical particles (Section 2.5).

Following that we will discuss the reduced conﬁguration space approach to identical parti-
cles (Section 2.6), which lead to anyons, followed by an explanation of the most striking evi-
dence for their existence, the Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect (Section 2.7). Moving through the
Ahoronov-Bohm Eﬀect (Section 2.8), we will explain homotopy, an important topological tool, and
will speciﬁcally discuss a relatively unusual tool, the fundamental groupoid (Section 2.9).

This background chapter concluded, there will come our novel results. First, we explore the
possibilities of quantization in multiply-connected spaces through the representations of the funda-
mental groupoid (Chapter 3). This can be used to choose speciﬁc topological amplitudes for paths,
not just for loops as with the fundamental group. We use this to provide consistent amplitudes for
distinguishable particle exchanges, which, in the special case of the punctured plane, gives us dis-
tinguishable anyons. These can be combined using the operational results mentioned in Section 2.5
to create identical anyons (Chapter 4). This cleanly breaks up the behavior of identical anyons
into the topological level, which is what grants them the ability to interpolate between bosons and
fermions, and the operational level, which gives rise to the bosons and fermions due to identicality.
Finally, we will explore the persistence of the view that the reduced conﬁguration space is vital
for anyons and their exploration, providing some philosophical background having to do with the
idea of identity (Chapter 5). We will ﬁnd that the attempt to avoid the use of labels as unmeasurable
in themselves simply leads to other kinds of unmeasurable superstructure, whether it is in covering
spaces or ﬁber bundles. This approach oﬀers no escape from auxiliary degrees of freedom.

3

chapter 2

DETAILED BACKGROUND ON IDENTICAL PARTICLES

2.1 The Strangeness of Quantum Mechanics

Quantum mechanics has been a counter-intuitive theory since its inception. The link between its
abstract mathematical formalism and experienced reality is through measurements, for which it
only provides a statistical distribution [47], yet it does not include an underlying deterministic
theory. It satisﬁes complementarity [48], so that attempts to ascribe qualities to systems outside
of measurements lead to paradoxes, like that of Einstein et al. [49]. Identical quantum-mechanical
particles behave strangely, either satisfying the Pauli Exclusion Principle [50] or Bose-Einstein
statistics [51, 52].

Nevertheless, it has been extremely successful at explaining phenomena which were not amenable
to classical physical models, and was able to generate many successful predictions, which then lead
to additional phenomena worth investigating. As a result, most of the intellectual energy dedi-
cated to quantum mechanics has been focused upon solving problems with it, rather than better
understanding its foundations.

For those who did wish for quantum mechanics to be more intuitive, there was a sense that in
the background to quantum mechanics there might lie a theory that is classical, albeit statistical
and very complicated. From the Bohm-de Broglie pilot wave theory [53, 54] to Nelson’s stochastic
mechanics [55], it seemed like there must be a way to dig in and ﬁnd an underlying deterministic
theory. However, results such as the theorems of Bell [56] and Kochen and Specker [57] showed that,
even if such a theory were to be found, it would be highly non-local, as well as context-dependent.
Therefore, it would be nothing like classical models which we previously found conducive to our
understanding.

2.2 Reconstructing Quantum Mechanics

These issues have lead researchers to investigate other routes of rebuilding or reconstructing quan-
tum mechanics, in ways which bring into focus the physical intuitions required to understand it.
Hardy’s 5 axioms [58] are an attempt to use continuous unitary transformations as the highlight
of quantum behavior, while working within the realm of states and operators. Caticha’s Entropic
Dynamics [59] tries to go as far as possible with ideas stemming from information processing, before
adding physical assumptions, resulting in the wave-function formalism through a Hamilton-Jacobi
formulation.

Our work follows upon the operational approach introduced in Goyal et al. [28] to reconstruct
speciﬁcally the Feynman rules for quantum mechanics [27]. Before we delve into it, let us provide a
brief overview of how the Feynman rules relate to the more familiar Dirac-Schr¨odinger formulation.

2.3 Schr¨odinger vs. Feynman Rules in Quantum Mechanics

The usual entity of importance in quantum mechanics is the wave-function, or, more generally, the
wave-vector, which is a description of the physical state of a system. We start with the state in

4

which a system is prepared. In Dirac notation, we have:

|ψ0(cid:105) ;

(2.1)

the wave-function for a particle is written as ψ0(x) = (cid:104)x|ψ0(cid:105). The prepared system then evolves
with time, with an optional interaction with an outside ﬁeld, which is expressed by transforming
this wave-vector or wave-function through the application of a unitary transformation generated
by a Hamiltonian H, which, for simplicity, we take to be time-independent:

|ψ(t)(cid:105) = e−iHt/

|ψ0(cid:105) ;

(2.2)

the current wave-function is then ψ(x, t) = (cid:104)x|ψ(t)(cid:105). Finally, the system is measured, using a
complete orthonormal set of wave-functions |e(cid:105) representing the possible classical outcomes. The
probability for each outcome e is then the absolute value squared of the component of the resulting
wave-function on the member of the unitary basis reﬂecting that outcome (Born’s Rule):

Pr(e) = |(cid:104)e|ψ(t)(cid:105)|2 .

(2.3)

The Feynman approach focuses on the relation between preparation and measurement. We can
rewrite the inner product between the ﬁnal wave-function and a measurement state as a matrix
element of a propagator indexed by the initial state and the ﬁnal state:

so that:

A(e) = (cid:104)e|ψ(t)(cid:105) = (cid:104)e| e−iHt/

|ψ0(cid:105)

(2.4)

(2.3’)

Full calculation comes through the Feynman path-integral approach, in which one would write:

ψ(x, t) = (cid:104)x|ψ(t)(cid:105) = (cid:104)x| e−iHt/

Pr(e) = |A(e)|2 .
ˆ
ˆ

|ψ0(cid:105) =
=

dx(cid:48) (cid:104)x| e−iHt/(cid:12)(cid:12)x(cid:48)(cid:11)(cid:10)x(cid:48)(cid:12)(cid:12)ψ0

(cid:11)

dx(cid:48)K(x, t ; x(cid:48))ψ0(x(cid:48)),

(2.5)

and the propagator K(x, t ; x(cid:48)) becomes the interface with physical theory. Feynman’s rules then
relate to how these propagators act when additional measurements are interposed between the
preparation and the ﬁnal measurement.

Acting through transition amplitudes or propagators makes many quantum mechanical phe-
nomena easier to express. For example, if we have a transition amplitude AU for a particle passing
from a point x on the left of a barrier to a point y to the right of it when only one hole is open, and
another transition amplitude AD for passing from one to the other when only another hole is open,
then the amplitude for this transitions when both holes are open is AU +AD. This is generally
called the sum rule for transition amplitudes. The fact that it is the amplitudes rather than the
probabilities which add is what causes an interference pattern to appear on a screen to the right.
On the other hand, if a measurement were to decide whether a particle was going through one hole
or the other, then the probabilities would add, as would be expected for classical particles.

The other Feynman rules are the product rule, which states that the amplitudes of two processes
done in succession multiply (which can easily be seen from the propagator expression, since succes-
sive developments in time simply multiply by e−iHtn/
); reciprocity, which states that the amplitude
of a set of measurements or a path taken in reverse order (within a short enough timeframe, so
that e−iHt/
→ I) is the complex conjugate; and, ﬁnally, Born’s rule for calculating the probabilities
from the amplitudes, which states that the transition probability is given by the modulus-squared
of the corresponding amplitude.

5

2.4 The Operational Approach to Quantum Mechanics

The aim of the operational approach in Ref. [28] is to derive the Feynman rules for these transi-
tion amplitudes from more fundamental principles. Focusing on amplitudes rather than states or
measurement operators has the advantage of inter-relating physically measurable results, namely
measurement outcomes. The idea is that suﬃciently many physical assumptions may result in some
constraints on how these amplitudes can be combined, and then we will end up with Feynman’s
rules, from which the rest of Quantum Mechanics can be derived.

This seems to have ﬁrst been attempted by Tikochinsky [60, 61], and independently by Caticha
[62]. The idea was simple: start from sequences of measurement outcomes as your basic objects,
and assume that their probability is derived from complex transition amplitudes. Then use the
ways in which these sequences can be combined to ﬁnd symmetries in the functions relating the
respective amplitudes, which lead to functional equations. Solutions to these equations lead to
the sum, product, and complex conjugate rules. Three main distinctions between Refs. [60, 61]
and Ref. [62] were that the latter, unlike the former, had a more careful deﬁnition of “and” and
“’or”, did not assume determinism, and did not use reciprocity, which corresponds to negation
from Cox [63], and which they would rather avoid. The third distinction is acknowledged in the
retrospective Tikochinsky and Gull [64].

Nevertheless, both of these derivations assume complex numbers, and moreover, that the func-
tions in their functional equations are analytic, so that it makes sense to diﬀerentiate them by
their complex arguments. In both cases, analyticity does a lot of the heavy lifting for them, and
there is a risk that the importance of other physical or logical assumptions is neglected as a result.
Indeed, Ref. [60] itself notes that, once analyticity has been used, one of the algebraic symmetries
is automatically satisﬁed. Analyticity also does most of the work in Tikochinsky [26].

Goyal et al. [28] is notable for starting with weaker hypotheses: instead of assuming analyticity,
or even complex numbers, they posit that two real numbers are fundamentally needed to calculate
the probability of a process, an assumption which they argue is a formalization of complementar-
ity [48]. That, combined with several other assumptions that are physically or logically motivated,
leads to the Feynman rules, without assuming analyticity.

2.5 Behavior of Identical Particles in Quantum Mechanics

Once the basics of quantum mechanics have been derived by a certain framework, the best way
to bolster its credibility is to apply it to additional problems in quantum mechanics, and to see
whether it can shed any light on them. Indeed, Tikochinsky [26] did so for the issue of identical
particles in quantum mechanics.

Current elementary particles fall into two types: bosons and fermions. Bosons can be pushed
into the same state without limit. Photons are bosons, which is why electromagnetic waves are
so easily treated classically: the overabundance of photons in the same state masks the quantum
nature of light. In wave-function terms, this property is expressed in their overall wave-function
being symmetric; for example:

Ψ(x2, x1, x3) = +Ψ(x1, x2, x3).

(2.6)

Fermions, meanwhile, refuse to be in the same state. Electrons are fermions, which is why atoms
are built up by progressively ﬁlling up shells of electrons. This property is expressed by their
wave-function being anti-symmetric:

Ψ(x2, x1, x3) = −Ψ(x1, x2, x3).

6

(2.7)

The Symmetrization Postulate, as noted in Chapter 1, states that these are the only types
possible. Ref. [26] proved that this is the case for non-interacting particles, starting with the
Feynman rules Tikochinsky previously derived in Refs. [60, 61], and using the same framework.
Here, too, analyticity played a key role, as did several implicit assumptions.

The research reported in Neori and Goyal [2] and Goyal [1] was able to overcome the dependence
on analyticity. Additionally, one of the implicit assumptions in Ref. [26], namely, that the amplitude
for an identical particle transition had a functional dependence on the single-particle amplitudes,
was made explicit in the special case of two, non-interacting particles in Ref. [2]. In Ref. [1], this
was generalized to a form which allows the incorporation of interactions: the amplitude of the
identical-particle transition was now assumed to have a functional dependence on the amplitudes
for the corresponding transitions of the distinguishable particle system. This leads to a diﬀerent
view of what the Symmetrization Postulate means:
instead of limiting to two types of particle
behaviors, it limits to two types of combinations of distinguishable-particle behaviors.

2.6 The Reduced Conﬁguration Space

Now comes a signiﬁcant jump in subject and tone from the preceding, which focused on the stan-
dard, textbook approach to dealing with identical particles in non-relativistic quantum mechanics:
one starts by assuming that one knows how to quantize a system of distinguishable particles; one
then takes the elements of this quantum theory, whether these were wave-functions or transition
amplitudes, and imposes particle identity as a form of additional symmetry, which leads to con-
straints as to the types of statistics possible. This is the most common way of addressing identical
particles.

However, as we noted in Chapter 1, three foundational papers, Souriau [3], Laidlaw and DeWitt-
Morette [4] and Leinaas and Myrheim [5], took a diﬀerent approach. They assumed that the classical
particles were themselves identical, and then derived the resulting properties of identical quantum
particles from the nuances of the quantization of an already fully symmetrized system. Ref. [5]
argued most strongly for this point, responding to the questioning of the very idea of particle
labels rased in Mirman [29], and citing the Gibbs paradox [65] as additional evidence. These
papers initiated the the reduced conﬁguration space approach. This was presaged by a discussion
at the 5th Solvay Conference in 1927, where Einstein and Lorentz noted a problem with using
the full conﬁguration space for N particles, and Pauli responded with a solution involving ﬁeld
theory (see Bacciagaluppi and Valentini [66, pp. 181–183,442–443]). Nevertheless, our discussion
will continue to restrict itself to the non-relativistic regime, with a constant number of particles.

Since the developments in this approach rely heavily on the properties of the space of the classical

particles, they had to make that an explicit parameter of their analysis, choosing: Rn, for n ≥ 1.
All three papers reproduce the symmetrization postulate for identical particles in R3, considered
the most physical single-particle conﬁguration space.
In fact, the Symmetrization Postulate is
recovered for any n ≥ 3. However, the situation is diﬀerent in two and one dimensions. This is
merely referred to in passing in Refs. [3, 4], but is developed at length in Ref. [5]. Their treatment
shows that in those cases, there is a continuous interpolation between fermions and bosons. The
two-dimensional case in particular leads to particles dubbed anyons. They capture the properties
of excitations in two-dimensional quantum systems, and their physical manifestation is found in
the Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect [32–36].

As already presaged in Schulman [67], where it was noted that the fundamental group for a
twice-punctured plane is non-abelian, further theoretical development of this approach included the
incorporation of parastatistics, in this case particles existing in multiple-dimensional representations

7

of the braid group. Another direction was the extension from Rn to circles, tori and spheres. These,
and the use of more advanced mathematical tools, are summarized in Imbo et al. [68].

In the next section, we will examine the clearest expression of anyons in Nature, the fractional

quantum Hall eﬀect for low-temperature two-dimensional systems.

2.7 The Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect and Anyons

The Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect furnishes the most reliable evidence for the existence of anyons
in Nature. We will build up to them, starting from the Classical Hall Eﬀect, for which the only form
of quantization needed is the fact that charges are discrete, passing through the Integer Quantum
Hall Eﬀect, in which electrons are quantum-mechanical, but non-interacting, and ﬁnally to the
Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect, in which electron-electron interaction is fundamental, and over
which anyonic excitations can form.

The Hall eﬀect [69] is the existence of a transverse voltage drop over an approximately ﬂat
conductor in the direction perpendicular to a magnetic ﬁeld passing through it. After charges
realign so that the system is in a steady state, charges are expected to move along the wire, so
that the forces in the transverse direction, being the Lorentz force from the magnetic ﬁeld in one
direction, and the electrostatic force from the inhomogeneous charge distribution in the other, will
cancel out. This results in a Hall voltage:

VHall =

IB
qnh

,

(2.8)

where I is the current, B is the magnetic ﬁeld component perpendicular to the plane of the wire, q
is the unit charge of the current carriers, n is the density of the carriers in the material, and h is
the wire’s height. (See Figure 2.1)

Figure 2.1: Negative charge carriers passing horizontally through a conductor subject to a magnetic
ﬁeld pointing towards the page create a vertical Hall voltage.

This can be rewritten as the Hall coeﬃcient:

RHall (cid:44) VHallh
IB

=

1
nq

,

(2.9)

so that macroscopic measurements in the middle expression is a measure of an important property
of the material on the right: namely, the charge density of the carriers, and very importantly, their
sign.

In usual conductors, such as copper, the sign is negative, as clearly current is carried by electrons,
so q = −e. One indication that the situation in semiconductors is peculiar, and requires the use of
the quantum theory of solids, is the existence of positive Hall coeﬃcients, meaning that they act as

8

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxIVHallif they have positively-charged current carriers, even though the positive ions do not move around.
The solution is that holes, or absences of electrons in almost-ﬁlled energy bands, act like positive
carriers.

Nevertheless, this is insuﬃcient for understanding the Quantum Hall Eﬀects. As their name
would suggest, they depend on the explicit quantum behavior of electrons in solids under a magnetic
ﬁeld. Let us start with the Integer Quantum Hall Eﬀect.

In the classical case, we expect the Hall conductance σHall to depend linearly on the reciprocal

of the external magnetic ﬁeld 1/B:

σHall =

I

VHall

=

qnh
B

;

(2.10)

however, at low temperatures, and under suﬃciently strong magnetic ﬁelds, the situation becomes
(cid:44) 2πc/q):
quite diﬀerent. Let us rewrite the expression in terms of the London unit of ﬂux (Φq
0

σHall =

qnh
B

=

q(N/V )h

B

=

qN
BA

=

qN
Φ

=

qN
k 2πc

q

=

N
k ·

q2
2πc

,

(2.11)

where A is the area of the conductor in the direction perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld.

The ratio ν (cid:44) N/k, loosely the number of electrons per ﬂux quantum, is called the ﬁlling factor.
When this is an integer, it means that a Landau level is full. Now, if the ﬂat wire were completely
ordered and pure, then we would not expect there to be any diﬀerence between this situation and
a classical one, as is argued in Laughlin [36], since we should be able to substitute any current with
a relativistic boost of a resting wire, so quantum phenomena would not enter into it. However, if
there are imperfections in the sample, these cause there to be localized states, which create gaps
between the Landau levels. This leads to plateaus, as there are regions in which an increase in the
magnetic ﬁeld does not lead to additional empty states in the next Landau level. These plateaus
are the manifestation of the integer quantum Hall eﬀect measured by von Klitzing et al. [70]. Notice
that the discussion so far has treated electrons as non-interacting fermions (hence the importance
of ﬁlled or unﬁlled Landau levels). Under these circumstances, the integer eﬀect is the most we
can comprehend. In order to explain the fractional eﬀect, we will need to incorporate collective
behavior.

Following the exposition in Stormer [35], for a non-integer ν = N/k, we can think of the
system in the two-dimensional conductor as consisting of N electrons per k vortices generated
by ﬂux quanta; furthermore, the vortices represent a many-particle conﬁguration in which there
is a gap in the electron cloud. If we take Coulomb interactions into account, it is energetically
favorable for electrons to coincide with these vortices, and the more vortices surrounding each
electron, the farther away are the rest of the electrons, so the lower the energy. The lowest-energy
conﬁguration will have the vortices spread evenly between the electrons. For example, for a ﬁlling
factor of ν = 1
3 , the case measured in Tsui et al. [32] and theoretically explained by Laughlin
[33, 71], the favored state has three vortices surrounding each electron. The resulting electrons
with ﬂuxes are called composite particles.

The ﬂux quanta generating these vortices have important consequences for statistics. Each ﬂux
quantum changes the sign of an exchange. So an electron (a fermion) with an odd number of ﬂux
quanta becomes a boson, while if it has an even number of ﬂux quanta, it remains a fermion. In
the ν = 1
3 case, the number of ﬂux quanta is odd, so we get composite bosons. That means that
they can condensate, and we get a very stable multi-particle ground state. Like in the integer case,
there is a plateau, hence the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect. Note that for ν = 1
2 , each electron
would be coupled with two ﬂux quanta at the ground state; this would make the composite particle

9

a fermion, and these ﬁll up the Landau levels until the Fermi energy. The situation is similar to
that at zero ﬁeld, so the system behaves as then: without a plateau.

So far we have only discussed composite particles, which are fermions with ﬂux quanta trans-
forming them either into bosons or back into fermions. The objects which have fractional statistics
are quasiparticles which are excitations of the condensate. We again discuss the ν = 1
3 case.
Suppose we change the magnetic ﬁeld a little. Then we may increase it, adding a ﬂux quantum,
equivalent to a deﬁcit of one-third of an electron, or a quasiparticle of charge + 1
3 e. Alternately,
if the magnetic ﬁeld is slightly less than necessary for this ﬁlling factor, then a few electrons will
be missing their third ﬂux, so there will be surpluses of thirds of electrons, or quasiparticles of
charge − 1
3 . As shown in Halperin [72, 73] and Arovas et al. [34], these particles have an anyonic
phase of eiπ/3 (and generally, for an excitation over ﬁlling factor ν, the anyonic phase is eiπν). It is
also there that the connection with Ref. [30] and, in the latter, with Ref. [5], is made.

Since the fractional quasiparticles are excitations of collective states of a material, they cannot
simply be extracted, interfered with one another, and then detected in convenient bubble chambers
in order to establish their statistics.
Instead, interference must happen within the same two-
dimensional material, at low temperature, and the magnetic ﬁeld needed to establish the condensate
over which they arise. It took more than two decades, but this was eventually achieved by two
groups: Camino et al. [37] and Kim et al. [38]. The former provides particular credence to promoting
distinguishable anyons, as the evidence is provided through the interference of one ν = 1
3 particle
around a tube full of ν = 2
5 particles. This is seen as evidence of anyon “statistics” even though these
particles are distinguishable. This is another example of the fact that, at least in the experimental
literature, “statistics” is used interchangeably with a topological interaction between the particles,
rather than some property hinging on particle identity, or the reduction of the conﬁguration space.
We will pursue anyonic behavior for distinguishable particles through strictly topological tools
in Section 4.1.

But is this evidence of anyons, or just of excitations which act anyonically? After all, these
are not fundamental particles, but quasi particles over a complicated ground-state. Their existence
depends upon interactions between more fundamental particles, namely electrons and ions in a solid,
as well as an external magnetic ﬁeld. However, even in Quantum Field Theory, which is the theory
where many of what we call fundamental particles are expressed, there is an underlying assumption
that it is an eﬀective theory of excitations over something more fundamental. That is the basis
for renormalization: the theory does not express behavior all the way to arbitrarily high energies
or arbitrarily short distances, so it is valid to simply stop integration at a certain maximal energy,
in order to avoid the ultra-violate divergences. In that sense, the fractional statistics excitations
over the Fractional Quantum Hall Eﬀect ground state are explained by an anyonic eﬀective theory,
and are measurable, so they are evidence of such particles existing, and therefore any foundational
approach to quantum mechanics would have to be able to take that into account.

In order to facilitate our ability to do so, we will introduce a simpler example of the importance
of topology in quantum mechanics, the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect, followed by an introduction to
relevant mathematical tools necessary for the rest of this Part, namely path homotopy and the
fundamental groupoid.

2.8 The Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect

We now step back from the 1980s to the late 1950s. One of the ﬁrst hints that global aspects of
the conﬁguration space create curious situations in quantum mechanics came from the Aharonov-
Bohm eﬀect [74]. Unlike their lesser-known predecessor Ehrenberg and Siday [75], covering similar

10

ground, Ref. [74] cited topological concerns explicitly. The issue in question was a peculiar property
of electromagnetism in the quantum formalism. Recall that in classical electromagnetism, it is the
ﬁelds E and H which are fundamental and appear in the equations of motion:

(˙r × B) ,
while the potentials φ and A, related to the former through:

m¨r = eE +

e
c

E = −∇φ and A = ∇×A,

(2.12)

(2.13)

are relegated to formal convenience when expressing such systems in the Lagrange or Hamilton
formalisms. In quantum mechanics, however, it is in fact the Hamiltonian which appears in the
main dynamical equation, whether that of Schr¨odinger or of Heisenberg, and similarly it is the
Lagrangian which appears in the Feynman path integral approach. Both of these feature the
potentials directly.

Now, quantum mechanics is gauge invariant; in the Schr¨odinger formalism, this is expressed by

saying that if Ψ is a solution of:

i ∂
∂t

Ψ(r) =

then Ψ(cid:48) = e

iqc ΛΨ is a solution of:

i ∂
∂t

Ψ(cid:48)(r) =

(cid:20) 1
(cid:20) 1

2m

2m

(cid:104)
−i∇−
(cid:104)
−i∇−

q
c

q
c

(cid:105)2
(cid:105)2

(cid:21)
(cid:21)

A(x, t)

+ qφ(x, t)

Ψ(r),

(2.14)

A(cid:48)(x, t)

+ qφ(cid:48)(x, t)

Ψ(cid:48)(r),

(2.14(cid:48))

with:

A(cid:48) = A + ∇Λ and φ(cid:48) = φ −

1
c

∂
∂t

Λ,

(2.15)

for arbitrary Λ(x, t). Since the only eﬀect on the wave-function is multiplying by a phase, the
potentials themselves are not signiﬁcant directly; however, in some cases one is forced to have a
non-zero potential in a region where no ﬁeld operates; for example, around an isolated solenoid
containing a magnetic ﬁeld. Does this ﬁeld then have a physical eﬀect, even though the electron is
excluded from the region in which the ﬁeld itself acts?

The surprising answer is that it does, in fact, have an eﬀect: the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect. The
interference pattern created by an electron scattering around an isolated solenoid depends in a
measurable way on the ﬂux through this same solenoid. Let us show how this comes about.

We start with the Schr¨odinger formalism. Let us use a setup as in Figure 2.2. We have an
electron emitter E on the left, and an array D of electron detectors on the right. In between, we
have a screen S, presumed to extend arbitrarily high and low, with two slits, A and B, between
which is embedded a solenoid which is isolated from the electrons, and through which passes a
magnetic ﬂux, controlled by adjusting the current running through it. Finally, we single out some
point xi on the left side of the screen, and a representative point xf at one of the detectors.

The wave-function value for a point xf on the screen for the packet created when B is closed
B (xf). Due to the superposition

and there is no ﬂux is Ψ(0)
principle, when both slits are open, the total wave-function value will be:

A (xf), while when A is closed we have Ψ(0)

Ψ(0)
Σ (xf) = Ψ(0)

A (xf) + Ψ(0)

B (xf).

(2.16)

Now we perform the same experiment with a current running through the solenoid, creating a
total ﬂux Φexc, while there is still no ﬁeld outside of the excluded area. With B blocked, there are

11

Figure 2.2: E is an electron emitter, D is an array of electron detectors on the right, S is a screen
with two slits, A and B, and a solenoid which is isolated from the electrons, and through which
there passes a magnetic ﬂux Φ controlled via the current. xi is an arbitrary point near the emitter,
and xf is the location of a detector.

no longer any holes in the region allowed for the electrons; furthermore, there is no magnetic ﬁeld
in this region, so that the vector potential satisﬁes:

∇×A = 0;

(2.17)

this means that we can apply Stokes’ theorem to show that the line integral of the vector potential
between two points only depends on the end-points, or, equivalently, that the vector potential is a
conservative ﬁeld, and is generated by a scalar function:
A = ∇ΛA,
ˆ

where we choose:

(2.18)

ΛA(x) (cid:44)

Aexc(x(cid:48))·dx(cid:48).
xi−→A

x

(2.19)

We can then use a gauge transformation to express the eﬀect on the wave-function at the

detector through multiplication by an appropriate phase depending on this generating function:

similarly:

where:

Ψ(Φexc)

A

(xf) = e

iqc ΛA(xf)Ψ(0)

A (xf);

Ψ(Φexc)

B

(xf) = e
ˆ

iqc ΛB(xf)Ψ(0)

B (xf),

ΛB(x) (cid:44)

Aexc(x(cid:48))·dx(cid:48)
xi−→B

x

Using simple superposition, we get for the total wave-function:

Ψ(Φexc)

T

(xf) = e

Now (see Figure 2.3):

= e

ﬃ

iqc ΛA(xf)(cid:104)

iqc ΛA(xf)Ψ(0)
A (xf) + e
Ψ(0)
A (xf) + e
¨

ΛB(xf) − ΛA(xf) =

Aexc(x)·dx =
xi(cid:11)xf

S

(2.20)

(2.21)

(2.22)

(2.23)

(cid:105)

.

iqc ΛB(xf)Ψ(0)
iqc [ΛB(xf)−ΛA(xf)]Ψ(0)

B (xf) =

B (xf)

¨

S

B·da = Φexc,

(2.24)

∇×Aexc(x)·da =

12

EDABΦxixfiqc ΛA(xf)(cid:104)

(cid:105)

so:

ΨΦexc

T

(xf) = e

A (xf) + e2πi(Φexc/Φq
Ψ(0)

0)Ψ(0)

B (xf)

;

(2.25)

we see that the magnetic ﬂux in the solenoid, which the electron does not encounter directly,
nevertheless can be probed by the electron through the interference pattern on the detector array.
This eﬀect has the period Φq
, called London’s unit of ﬂux, which we mentioned in Section 2.7.
0

(cid:44) 2πc

q

Figure 2.3: Subtracting ΛA from ΛB results in a closed line integral around the ﬂux, which leads
to a surface integral including the ﬂux via Stokes’ theorem.

Let us now show how the path integral formalism, which we will be using extensively later, is

applied to this case. Recall that there, the focus is on calculating propagators:

ˆ

Ψf (xf , tf ) =

(2.26)

K(xf, tf ; xi, ti)Ψf (xi, ti)d3x,
ˆ

(cid:18) iS[x(t)]

(cid:19)



that is, K is the transition amplitude between one point to the other. This is calculated through
the path integral:

K(xf, tf ; xi, ti) =

exp

D{x(t)},

(2.27)

where D{•} is used instead of d• in the integral in order to emphasize the sum over paths. The
action functional S is deﬁned as:

tfˆ
L (x(t), ˙x(t), t) dt.

S[x(t)] =

ti

(2.28)

For a charged particle in a general electromagnetic ﬁeld aﬀecting it directly, denoted by the
scalar potential φ0 and the vector potential A0, along with an additional time-constant magnetic
ﬁeld excluded from the space of the particle, denoted by Aexc:

L(x, ˙x, t) =

m
2

˙x2 − qφ0(x, t) +

q
c

[A0(x, t) + Aexc(x)] · ˙x,

(2.29)

Since the vector potential for the excluded ﬂux is time-independent, if we integrate the La-
grangian into an action, we get an additive term depending only on the path in space, rather than

13

EDABxixf−ΛAΛBΦon the path in space-time:

tfˆ

S[x(t)] =

=

ti

tfˆ

ti

(cid:16) m
(cid:16) m

2

2

˙x2 − qφ0(x, t) +

˙x2 − qφ0(x, t) +

q
c

q
c

(cid:17)

dt =

(2.30)

A0(x, t) · ˙x +

Aexc(x) · ˙x

q
c

(cid:17)

A0(x, t) · ˙x

dt +

q
c

Aexc(x)·dx.

xi

If we now deﬁne the ﬁrst term, which only depends on the particle’s behavior and the ﬁelds
acting upon it, as S0[x(t)], and see the integral in the second term as a generalization of the Λ
functions from earlier into a functional Λ[x(t)], and insert these into the exponent in Eq. (2.27),
we get the following suspiciously familiar result:

xfˆ

(cid:19)

ˆ

(cid:18) i

(cid:19)

(cid:18) iq

c

K(xf, tf ; xi, ti) =

exp

S0[x(t)]

· exp

Λ[x(t)]

D{x(t)};

(2.31)

Now, in Figure 2.4, we return to the setup above, this time dispensing with the screen and slits.

Figure 2.4: Electrons emanate from the emitter E to the detectors D, while being excluded from
a solenoid containing a ﬂux Φ. Two distinct families of paths are illustrated: the line integral for
those above is ΛA, for those below ΛB.

Suppose we take a path xA(t) which passes above the solenoid, without winding around it, like
one of those included in ΛA in Figure 2.4, and compare it to another path, x(cid:48)A(t), which can be
smoothly deformed into it, while still having the same end-points. Then if we look at the surface SA
between them, it does not contain any net ﬂux, meaning that, using a process similar to Eq. (2.24):

ﬃ

∂SA

¨

SA

Λ[x(cid:48)A(t)] − Λ[xA(t)] =

Aexc(x)·dx =

B·da = Φ(SA) = 0.

(2.32)

Therefore, we can ascribe a constant value, which we will call ΛA, to all paths which can be
smoothly deformed into one that goes from above. Similarly, we can do the same for all paths that
pass below without winding, overall, that is, which can be smoothly deformed into one of those
marked by ΛB in Figure 2.4, again, while retaining the end-points xi and xf .

However, if we compare a path from below to a path from above, we will get, as in Eq. (2.24),

that:

Λ[xB(t)] − Λ[xA(t)] = Φexc.

(2.33)

14

EDΦxixfΛAΛBIn fact, there is an inﬁnity of classes of paths. Each class is deﬁned by the winding number it has
in relation to the paths with ΛA, or number of times that it is going around the ﬂux in the center,
equivalent to the times it counts the excluded ﬂux in its net ﬂux. If we deﬁne KA
0 (xf, tf ; xi, ti),
KB
0 (xf, tf ; xi, ti), etc., to be the path integral:

ˆ

(cid:18) i

(cid:19)

exp

S0[x(t)]

D{x(t)}

(2.34)

limited to paths of the class A, B, etc., respectively, then we can break up Eq. (2.31) into a sum by
these classes:

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

K(xf, tf ; xi, ti) = e

iqc ΛAKA

0 (xf, tf ; xi, ti) + e

iqc ΛBKB

0 (xf, tf ; xi, ti) + ···.

(2.35)

If we remove the explicit dependence on start and end points for brevity, we get a result similar to
that in Eq. (2.25):

iqc ΛA

K = e

KA
0 + e

iqc (ΛB−ΛA)KB

0 ) + ···

iqc ΛA

= e

0 + e2πi(Φexc/Φq
KA

0)KB

0 ) + ···

.

(2.36)

the magnitude of the probability amplitude therefore oscillates with period Φq
the Schr¨odinger picture.

0, as we saw from

An advantage of the path integral approach is that it is easier to get to the crux of the matter.
For let us return to the reason that the vector potential A cannot be identically zero outside the

solenoid. The ﬁeld is zero, and B = ∇× A, so a null vector potential would be consistent with

this requirement. Furthermore, Stokes’ theorem, relating the line integral of a vector ﬁeld around
a region with the surface integral of the curl of this ﬁeld through that region would suggest that a
zero potential will be valid wherever this theorem would apply, as the line integral should be zero
anyway. However, when we take a path around the solenoid, regardless of whether the electron
passes through it, the electromagnetic ﬁeld does exist within it, so that a use of Stokes’ theorem
results in the line integral equaling the total ﬂux through the solenoid, times the number of turns
of the path. Furthermore, this total ﬂux is a parameter that aﬀects the interference pattern of an
electron scattered through this system. In eﬀect, the electron is probing a portion of the physical
electromagnetic ﬁeld with which it does not interact directly, simply because this ﬁeld goes through
a “hole” in this region, so that without it the region is no longer simply-connected, a term we shall
explain in the next section.

Now, in itself this is merely another piece of evidence for the non-locality of quantum mechanics.
Moreover, the closed line integral itself, depending as it does on ﬁeld values, is already a gauge-
invariant quantity in the classical theory as well, so that is not an issue. However, it does raise the
question of what happens when the conﬁguration space of a system is really multiply-connected.
What if we ﬁnd a space in which there are real, intrinsic holes, where absolutely nothing, neither
ﬁelds nor matter, exists? Then there seems to be an ambiguity in the deﬁnition of the problem. If
we take the physical ﬁelds and extend them to the hole, then depending on what ﬂux this creates
in the now “ﬁlled-out” region, we could have diﬀerent constraints on the behavior outside. Initial
conditions and ﬁelds in the conﬁguration space are no longer enough information; we must add a
new piece of information, in this case, the line integral of the vector potential around each “hole”.
But is that always the case? What if the space cannot be described as a plane with holes in it?
For example, the topological group of rotations in three dimensions, SO(3), is doubly-connected;
that is, if you take a path once around an axis, Stokes’ theorem does not apply, but compounding
this path with itself leads to one in which this can again be done. What is needed is a language
which generalizes the notion of “holes”, and then an approach to quantum mechanics which will
allow us to quantize systems with such generalized spaces. That language is homotopy theory, and
these spaces are multiply-connected conﬁguration spaces.

15

2.9 Homotopy and the Fundamental Groupoid

In the previous section, there was a property of paths in the conﬁguration space which made it
possible to conclude that the line integral of the potential around the them was zero. It seems to
have had to do with the fact that the surface that they captured between them was completely
within the space, and we knew we could apply Stokes’ theorem to show that the properties of the
curl inside that surface are what matters. Another way of putting it is that these paths could be
gradually deformed one into the other, while retaining the same endpoints. This is not the case
for the paths on opposite sides of the solenoid. This is a special case of a more general connection
between paths which is called homotopy (see Refs. [76, 77]). Here we will give a short review of the
subject, while focusing on an uncommonly used algebraic structure, the fundamental groupoid, to
be deﬁned below (see Ref. [78]).

We start with a space X which has some topology which we will keep implicit. Let us single
out two points in that space, a and b, which may be identical. A path from a to b is a smooth
function from the unit interval to the space:

such that q(0) = a and q(1) = b. We then write:
s(q) (cid:44) q(0),

t (q) (cid:44) q(1),

q : [0, 1] → X

(2.37)

(2.38)

the former being the path’s source, from which it is coming, the latter its target, to which it is
going. We say that two paths, q and q(cid:48), with the same source and target are homotopic to each
other if they can be smoothly deformed one into the other, while retaining the same end-points.
Mathematically speaking, this means that there is a smooth function:

F : [0, 1] × [0, 1] → X

(2.39)

such that F (t, 0) ≡ a, F (t, 1) ≡ b, F (0, t) ≡ q(t), and F (1, t) ≡ q(cid:48)(t). This is an equivalence
relation, and we can talk about the homotopy classes of paths between a and b; that of the path q
is [q], so this property can be written as:

[q] = [q(cid:48)]

(2.40)

that is, the homotopy classes of q and q(cid:48) are equal (see Figure 2.5).

Figure 2.5: Homotopic paths from a to b: [q] = [q(cid:48)].

When the two paths are not homotopic, we instead write:

that is, the homotopy classes of the two paths are diﬀerent (see Figure 2.6).

[q] (cid:54)= [q(cid:48)],

(2.41)

16

abqq0Figure 2.6: Non-homotopic paths from a to b: [q] (cid:54)= [q(cid:48)].

For a homotopy class [q], we extend the deﬁnitions for s and t in Eq. (2.38) to:

s([q]) (cid:44) s(q),

t ([q]) (cid:44) t (q);

(2.42)

these are well-deﬁned because paths in the same homotopy class share their source and target.

For convenience, if x is any point in X, then [x] is the homotopy class of the constant path at x.
Given two paths, q and p, such that t (q) = s(p), their concatenation qp is deﬁned as:

(cid:40)

(qp)(t) =

q(2t),
p(2t − 1),

0 ≤ t ≤ 1
2 < t ≤ 1

2

1

(2.43)

with [qp] = [q][p]; this operation can be shown to be associative (see Figure 2.7). The homotopy

Figure 2.7: Concatenation. Illustrating associativity: ([q][q(cid:48)])[q(cid:48)(cid:48)] = [q]([q(cid:48)][q(cid:48)(cid:48)]).

classes of a space X with concatenation form an algebraic structure, called its fundamental groupoid,
and written as Π(X, X). Let us go on a short detour to explain this structure, as it is not commonly
known.

The shortest deﬁnition of a groupoid is that it is a category where every morphism is invertible.
In our case, the objects of the category would be the points of the space X, and the morphisms
between two points are the homotopy classes of paths between them.

In more group-theoretic terms, a groupoid is a collection {α} on which a partial operation is
deﬁned, usually designated by a product, as are a source function s(•) and a target function t (•)
projecting to another space X, such that:

1. αβ is deﬁned if and only if s(β) = t (α).

2. The operation is associative: whenever (αβ)γ is deﬁned, then so is α(βγ), and they are equal.
3. For each α there is a reverse α−1, such that αα−1 = Is(α) and α−1α = It (α), where I x is an

element called the identity at x, so that s(I x) = t (I x) = x, and Is(β) β = β It (β) = β.
Normally we would call this the inverse, but inversion is also a symmetry of some very
important spaces, one example we of which we shall see in Section 3.2. The term reverse has
the advantage of being suitable for a discussion of paths.

17

abqq0abcd[q][q0][q00]([q][q0])[q00]abcd[q][q0][q00][q]([q0][q00])For a more thorough discussion, see Higgins [78]. A proof of the necessity of s and t is in the
Appendix.

We have already shown that the operation is well-deﬁned and associative. To complete the list
of requirements for a groupoid, we note that aside from concatenation, we also have reversal : for
each path q we may deﬁne a reverse, q−1, as follows:

and the two satisfy:

(q−1)(t) = q(1 − t),

so we may deﬁne [q]−1 (cid:44) [q−1], in the sense that [x] acts as I x (see Figure 2.8).

[q−1q] = [t (q)],

[qq−1] = [s(q)]

;

(2.44)

(2.45)

Figure 2.8: Reverse. We see that [a] = [q][q−1] and [b] = [q−1][q].

Let us now choose a point x0 in X. The fundamental group based at that point is:

Π(X, x0) = {[q]|s(q) = t (q) = x0} ;

(2.46)

that is, the classes of all the paths which start and ﬁnish at that point. They will also be called
loops (see Figure 2.9). Generally, for a subset A ⊆ X, Π(X, A) is the subgroupoid of all [q]

Figure 2.9: Loops through x0. [(cid:96)3] = [(cid:96)1][(cid:96)2]

where s([q]), t ([q]) ∈ A. Another special case used in Ref. [4] is Π(X, a, b), the collection of homo-
topy classes [q] with s([q]) = a and t ([q]) = b.
Fundamental groups at diﬀerent points are not entirely independent, as long as there is a path
connecting them. This is always the case when the space is path-connected, which is a postulate
common to Ref. [4] and to their successors. Indeed, let x1 and x2 be arbitrary points in X. Let l be
a loop based at x1, that is, s(l) = t (l) = x1, and let q be a path such that s(q) = x1 and t (q) = x2.
Then q−1lq is a loop based at x2, and [q]−1[l][q] is an element of the fundamental group there, so [q]
induces a homomorphism between the fundamental groups, since if l and k are loops based at x1,
then:

[q−1lkq] = [q−1][l][k][q] = [q−1][l][q][q−1][k][q] = [q−1lq][q−1kq];

(2.47)

18

b[q][q−1][a]a[q][q−1][b]x0‘1‘2‘3similarly, the reverse homotopy class [q]−1 induces a homomorphism in the opposite direction, and:

([q]−1)−1([q−1][l][q])[q]−1 = [qq−1lqq−1] = [l];

(2.48)

therefore, the homotopy class [q] induces an isomorphism between the two fundamental groups.
For any two homotopy classes, [q] and [p], such that s([q]) = s([p]) = x1 and t ([q]) = t ([p]) = x2,
the respective isomorphisms induced by them are related by:

[p−1lp] = [p−1qq−1lqq−1p] = [p−1q][q−1lq][p−1q]−1,

(2.49)

which is an inner isomorphism, that is, of the form α → βαβ−1, since [p−1q] ∈ Π(X, x2). We
will see in Chapter 3 that this leads to a simpliﬁcation for abelian groups and for one-dimensional
representations.

Finally, we can explain what we mean by simply-connected, multiply-connected, etc. Always
speaking of connected, path-connected spaces, a simply-connected space is one whose fundamental
group is trivial, that is, every closed loop in it can be contracted to a point, while a multiply-
connected space is one whose fundamental group is non-trivial. So the two-dimensional plane
without “holes” is simply-connected. A space with a hole, such as the space to which electrons are
restricted in the Aharonov-Bohm setup, is multiply-connected. In fact, it is inﬁnitely-connected, in
the sense used in e.g. Ref. [79]:
its fundamental group is isomorphic to an inﬁnite group, in this
case the inﬁnite cyclic group Z of integers.

Note that the Feynman path integral approach is very well-suited for exploring these topological

properties of spaces, as paths, rather than points, are its building blocks.

19

chapter 3

QUANTIZATION IN MULTIPLY-CONNECTED SPACES

3.1 Motivation and Relation to Homotopy

Before we present the result of this chapter, let us provide a review of some work with which it
contrasts, and from which it extracts some vital tools.

The path integral approach to multiply-connected spaces was originally introduced in Schulman
[80], and further disseminated through Schulman [79]. Those works developed a justiﬁcation for
discrete spin under the path integral formalism. The conﬁguration space which is quantized for that
purpose, that of SO(3) taken as a topological group, is not simply-connected, and that is where
the discussion of path integrals in multiply-connected spaces becomes necessary. The standard
deﬁnition of the path-integral becomes ambiguous under these circumstances: in a singly-connected
space, all paths between two given points are in the same homotopy class, so they are smoothly
deformable into each other, while retaining the same endpoints, and thus their contributions also
go smoothly into each other. Therefore, aside from an overall phase ambiguity, the sum over paths
making up the transition amplitude is deﬁned as:

ˆ

K(b, tb ; a, ta) =

D{x(t)} exp (iS{x(t)}/) ,

(3.1)

where x(t) runs over all smooth paths between a and b.

If there is more than one homotopy class, then the situation is diﬀerent: paths in one class can
no longer be smoothly deformed into those in another, so that neither do the phases, and we in
fact have to split the integral into a sum over integrals of these components:

(cid:88)

(cid:101)χ([x(t)])(cid:101)K[q](b, tb ; a, ta),

[q]∈Π(X,a,b)

K(b, tb ; a, ta) =
ˆ

(cid:101)K[q](b, tb ; a, ta) (cid:44)

(3.2)

(3.3)

with the partial amplitudes being deﬁned as the path integral limited to the homotopy classes:

and the weights (cid:101)χ([q]) yet to be determined. Note that, unlike in Section 2.9, the parameterizations

D{x(t) : [x(t)] = [q]} exp (iS{x(t)}/) ,

of the paths matter, which we indicate by writing them as x(t). The homotopy class of the
path [x(t)] is then that of the path reparamaterized to the unit interval:

q(t) = x ((tb − ta)t + ta) ;

(3.4)

we will use this notation in Section 3.2, as well.

In our adapted notation, Eq. (3.2) is the result in Ref. [79] from which Refs. [4, 81] start their
analysis. However, they do not parameterize the partial amplitudes with homotopy classes directly,
but instead through members of the fundamental group at some arbitrary point x0; hence the use
of the tilde. Now, we have seen in Section 2.9 that the fundamental groups at diﬀerent points for
a path-connected space are related; this paper goes a step further, capturing all homotopy classes,
that is, members of the fundamental groupoid, by just the fundamental group at a single point, x0.
This is done using a mesh, a choice of path from x0 to each point a:

C : X → {q| q : [0, 1] → X}

20

(3.5)

C(a)(0) = x,C(a)(1) = a.

This can be done because X is path-connected. Once a mesh has been chosen, a natural one-to-one
correspondence between elements of the fundamental group and those of the fundamental groupoid,
given the end-points, is given by:

fab : Π(X, x) → Π(X, a, b)
fab(α) = [C−1(a)]α[C(b)],
where C−1(a) is the reverse of the path C(a) (See Figure 3.1).

(3.6)

(3.7)

Figure 3.1: Loops become paths through a mesh: [qi] = fab([(cid:96)i]) = [C−1(a)][(cid:96)i][C(b)].

This works for any a and b, allowing a consistent deﬁnition of the partial amplitudes, as well

as their coeﬃcients in the expression for the total amplitude, indexed by the fundamental group:

Kα(b, tb ; a, ta) (cid:44) (cid:101)Kfab(α)(b, tb ; a, ta)

χ(α) (cid:44)(cid:101)χ(fab(α))
(cid:88)

α∈Π(X,x0)

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.10)

providing them with an amended version of Eq. (3.2):

K(b, tb ; a, ta) =

χ(α)Kα(b, tb ; a, ta),

as their new starting point. For them the partial amplitudes Kα are black boxes: they do not use the
formulas Eq. (3.1) or Eq. (3.3), so a signiﬁcant portion of the paper is dedicated to investigating
their properties as a stepping-stone to the more relevant results constraining χ(α). We will see
in Section 3.2 that a direct investigation of the integrand of Eq. (3.1) will save us much of this
trouble.

Returning to their method, we note that f respects the groupoid operation:

fab(α)fbc(β) = fac(αβ);

(3.11)

we ﬁnd it helpful to see it as a parametrized local inverse to a homomorphism from the fundamental
groupoid to the fundamental group at x0:

g : Π(X, X) → Π(X, x0)
g([q]) (cid:44) [C(s([q]))][q][C−1(t ([q]))],

21

(3.12)

(3.13)

abxq1q2C−1(a)C(b)‘2‘1so g([q][q(cid:48)]) = g([q])g([q(cid:48)]) and:

g(fab(α)) = α ;

fs([q])t ([q])(g([q])) = [q].

(3.14)

The main result of the work in Refs. [4, 81] is a proof that the weights χ(α) are a fundamental
group representation. They then show that the choice of mesh does not change the physical
predictions, but rather only the transition amplitudes by an overall phase, so that it is the choice
of group representation which embodies the additional, physically meaningful topological degree of
freedom.

However, this result has a limitation, which we have had to overcome, in order to apply these
methods to the problem of distinguishable anyons. These anyons would be required to have a
consistent topological phase for every simple, counter-clockwise exchange. Since such an exchange
would not be a closed loop, methods which only provide topological phases representing members
of the fundamental group will not be suitable.

To see this explicitly, let D(•) be the fundamental group representation, and let there be a

mesh C and base-point x0 chosen as well, so that g is well deﬁned. Then:

(cid:101)χ([q]) = D(g([q])),

(3.15)

that is, a fundamental groupoid representation has implicitly been chosen as well.

We will now show that this choice does not generally allow the incorporation of symmetries of

an example we will return to in Section 3.2, and will use in the next chapter. Let us deﬁne an

the space. We will do so for the important special case of the punctured plane, X = R2 \ {0},
inversion, “minus” operation, with −(a, b) (cid:44) (−a,−b), where (a, b) are Cartesian coordinates. We
break a circular loop counter-clockwise around the origin into two pieces, [q] and [−q], which are
related by a simple inversion symmetry (not to be confused with the reversed path, q−1, deﬁned
in Section 2.9):

as seen in Figure 3.2.

(−q)(t) = −(q(t)),

(3.16)

Figure 3.2: A counter-clockwise circle is broken up into a half-circle, q, and its inverse, −q.

We then get:

(cid:101)χ([q(−q)]) =(cid:101)χ([q])(cid:101)χ([−q]).

22

(3.17)

q−qaddition, [q(−q)] then corresponding to 1. Let us write:(cid:101)χ([q(−q)]) = z. This is the generator of the
Now, [q(−q)] generates the fundamental group at x0. We can then treat it as isomorphic to Z with
image of Z under χ(•). In order for this representation to respect inversion symmetry, we require:

(cid:101)χ([−q]) =(cid:101)χ([q]) = w,

(3.18)

(3.19)

(3.20)

(3.21)

so:

However, since z generates the group, we must have w = zk, giving

z = w2.

or

z = z2k,

1 = z2k−1.

Therefore, this is only possible for special choices of z, namely odd roots of unity. If we would
instead like to incorporate symmetries of the space for any value of z, we need to explore more
degrees of freedom for the groupoid representation, other than re-ordering the group representations
through a diﬀerent choice of mesh.

The next section (Section 3.2) will feature one of our novel results. We will start out by proving
that the phases are a groupoid representation directly. We will then explore what the additional
degrees of freedom are, beyond the choice of a fundamental group at a point. While they create
physically indistinguishable solutions, they do allow the incorporation of more of the symmetries
of the space at hand. The main simplifying tool in our treatment is that it starts from paths and
their phases, rather than from partial propagators. It is bottom-up rather than top-down, and does
not treat propagators as black boxes.

3.2 A Direct Path to the Fundamental Groupoid

The aim of this section is to improve upon the work in Refs. [4, 81], reviewed in the previous section,
in a way which uses the fundamental groupoid, bearing in mind its most general representations.
It will be seen that the result in Refs. [4, 81] is a special case of ours: we add a generalized gauge
freedom. We will also provide an example of a groupoid representation which incorporates the

rotational symmetry of the punctured plane, R2 \ {0}.

We start by exploring the origins of the topological degrees of freedom.

Instead of starting
from the top, that is, from the propagator and the quantum formalism, as do Schulman [80] and
its successors, we begin from the bottom, with Hamilton’s Principle in classical physics: the least
action principle, or, more accurately, the extremal action principle.

Given an initial time t1 and point x1, and a ﬁnal time t2 and point x2, we wish to ﬁnd the
path xc(t) which is extremal (that is, a local minimum, maximum, possibly saddle) for the action
functional:

t2ˆ

S{x(t)} =

t1

L(x(t), ˙x(t), t)dt.

(3.22)

23

We use {•} to denote a functional, rather than the usual [•], since we have already reserved the
latter for homotopy classes. More formally:

with the variation keeping t1, t2, x1, x2 ﬁxed. Therefore, the same path would be extremal, even if
a value depending only on these constants was added:

δS{xc(t)} = 0,

(3.23)

δS{x(t)} = δ (S{x(t)} + ς(x2, t2 ; x1, t1)) .

(3.24)

We can go even further: extrema are only modiﬁed if the action functional is changed in such a way
that its value for two paths which can be smoothly deformed into each other is altered; therefore,
we can have this parameter also depend on the homotopy class of x(t), and write

δS{x(t)} = δ(cid:0)

S{x(t)} + ς[x(t)](x2, t2 ; x1, t1)(cid:1) ,

(3.25)

and this is independent of the speciﬁc Lagrangian, so long as it has the same singularity behavior
(if applicable). In fact, we can write

ς[x(t)](x2, t2 ; x1, t1) = ς[x(t)](t2 ; t1),

(3.26)

as the end-points are implicit through s([x(t)]) = x1 and t ([x(t)]) = x2, where the source and
target functions s and t are as deﬁned in Section 2.9.

Finally, let us address time. Earlier literature widely agrees that the topological parameter
should be time-independent, with [41, 43, 45, 82–90] all making similar assumptions. However,
returning to the punctured plane, the topological degree of freedom is equivalent to a ﬂux through
a solenoid at the origin. That can be slowly changed, leading from one representation of the
fundamental group at a point to another. Gaveau et al. [91] go further to provide a solution for
general changes of ﬂux as a function of time. They ﬁnd that the only strictly topological parameter
is the enclosed ﬂux at an arbitrary point in time. Since this result depends explicitly on the
particular space being quantized, we expect a general solution to be more involved, and leave it to
future work. We therefore choose to focus on investigating a parameter which only depends on the
homotopy class of the path:

(cid:18) i

ς = ς([x(t)]);

(cid:19)

(cid:18) i

(cid:19)

Now we may calculate the appropriate Feynman amplitude for the path:

exp

 (S{x(t)} + ς([x(t)]))

= exp

S{x(t)}

· χ([x]),

(3.27)

(3.28)

where, to remain consistent with the terms in Refs. [4, 81], χ([x(t)]) is called the weight corre-
sponding to the homotopy class [x(t)], although we remove the “scare tilde”. In fact, since this
total amplitude must obey the Feynman product rule, and since we already know that the ﬁrst
factor does, as it is simply that corresponding to the original action, then these weights also obey
the Feynman rules.

We are no longer interested in the time-dependence of the paths, so we can revert to the
lowercase [q] notation introduced in Section 2.9. Combining concatenation, which gives [qp] = [q][p],
with the product rule of the weights gives us:

χ([q][p]) = χ([qp]) = χ([q])χ([p]);

(3.29)

24

meaning that χ(•) is a representation of the fundamental groupoid. Working directly with the
groupoid rather than the fundamental group allows us to more generally discuss the situation for
arbitrary paths, instead of being forced to work strictly through loops, as in Refs. [4, 81]. As a
subgroupoid of the fundamental groupoid, we have seen that fundamental groups in two points x1
and x2 are isomorphic, with isomorphisms induced by paths, and the relation between diﬀerent
isomorphisms being

[p−1lp] = [p−1q][q−1lq][p−1q]−1;

(2.49)

this is an inner isomorphism, as we stated in Section 2.9. If the group is abelian, or if we limit
ourselves to a one-dimensional representation χ, all inner isomorphisms collapse into the identity.
In the former case:

[p−1q][q−1lq][p−1q]−1 = [p−1q][p−1q]−1[q−1lq] = [q−1lq]

(3.30)

while in the latter case:

χ([p−1q][q−1lq][p−1q]−1) = χ([p−1q])χ([q−1lq])χ([p−1q]−1)

= χ([p−1q]−1)χ([p−1q])χ([q−1lq]) = χ([q−1lq]),

(3.31)

so all isomorphisms between x1 and x2 induced by paths are identical. Moreover:

χ([q−1lq]) = χ([q]−1[l][q]) = χ([q]−1)χ([l])χ([q])
= χ([q])χ([q]−1)χ([l]) = χ([q][q]−1[l])
= χ([x1][l]) = χ([l]).

(3.32)

This means that once a fundamental group representation is chosen at one point, it has been
set for all other points. However, this is not suﬃcient for describing the groupoid representation,
since we have only set the representations for loops, while we have to assign values to χ([q])
when s([q]) (cid:54)= t ([q]). As we noted in Eq. (3.15), the framework in Ref. [4] provides one way of
assigning these weights. We intend to generalize that framework, using the fact that we already
have the groupoid representation structure, in order to catalog all possible representations, allowing
us to choose one that implements the symmetry of the space. To that end, we must introduce the
notion of compatibility of representations. By saying that two representations χ and χ(cid:48) of the
fundamental groupoid are compatible we mean that, for any given a and b, there is phase eiδ(a,b)
such that:

χ(cid:48)([q]) = eiδ(a,b)χ([q]),

(3.33)

for all [q]s such that s([q]) = a and t ([q]) = b; that is, eiδ(a,b) only depends on the end-points.

When two representations are compatible, each one induces a propagator which results in the
same physical predictions as the other, as an overall phase is removed by taking the absolute value:

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:88)

[q]

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:88)

[q]

χ(cid:48)([q])K[q]

eiδχ([q])K[q]

χ([q])K[q]

χ([q])K[q]

(3.34)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)eiδ(cid:88)

[q]

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:88)

[q]

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

Let us now explore exactly what kind of leeway we have with a fundamental groupoid repre-
sentation once we have chosen a fundamental group representation, D(•). As we saw earlier, only
paths between distinct points a and b can have any ambiguity to them. Let us choose a homo-
topy class [p0] from a to b. Then any path class [q] between these two points can be related to

25

a loop around a through [q] (cid:55)→ [qp−1
representation:
D([qp−1

0 ]) = χ([qp−1

0 ]) = χ([q])χ([p0]−1),

0 ]. The weight of this object is set by the fundamental group

(3.35)

(3.36)

or:

χ([q]) = D([qp−1

0 ])χ([p0]);

note that this is self-consistent, as D([p0p−1

0 ]) = D(I a) = 1.

Na¨ıvely it would seem that, for each pair of points a and b, we are free to choose an arbitrary

class [pa→b], followed by a value χ([pa→b]).
This is not the case, however. First, this would lead to over-counting: as we have already chosen
a fundamental group representation, a choice of χ([pa→b]) is equivalent, for any other class [p(cid:48)a→b]
between these two points, to a choice of χ([p(cid:48)a→b]):

χ([p(cid:48)a→b]) = D([p(cid:48)a→b][pa→b]−1)χ([pa→b]).

(3.37)

Furthermore, the groupoid structure imposes severe limitations on our freedom. If we made the
following choices:

[pa→b], χ([pa→b]);

[pb→c], χ([pb→c]);

[pa→c], χ([pa→c]);

then they would be subject to the constraint:

χ([pa→b])χ([pb→c]) = χ([pa→b][pb→c]) = χ([pa→c])D([pa→c]−1[pa→b][pb→c]),

(3.38)

(3.39)

so even with proper counting, only two of the three can be freely chosen.

In short, we have a big set of degrees of freedom, but they are subject to over-counting and
interdependencies. Fortunately, Ref. [4] furnishes us with a way of organizing them: by using the
base-point and mesh formalism we reviewed in Section 3.1, but in a more generalized fashion.

If we single out any one point x0, and create a mesh from it to any other point, C(x), then we

can write, for any homotopy class [q] between a to b:

χ([q]) = χ([C(a)]−1[C(a)][q][C−1(b)][C(b)])

= χ([C(a)]−1)χ([C(a)qC−1(b)])χ([C(b)])
= χ([C(a)]−1)D([C(a)qC−1(b)])χ([C(b)]);

(3.40)

we retrieve Eq. (3.15) when we choose χ([C(x)]) ≡ 1. Generally, if we pick a diﬀerent base-point, x(cid:48)0,
and any mesh C(cid:48)(x), we have:

χ([C(cid:48)(x)]) = χ([C(x(cid:48)0)]−1)D([C(x(cid:48)0)C(cid:48)(x)C−1(x)])χ([C(x)]),

(3.41)

so once this has been chosen for one base-point and mesh, we have set it up for all base-points and
meshes. A special case of this is the one discussed in Ref. [4], a change of mesh with the same base-
point. Using our tools, we would also have to change the phases of the mesh so that χ([C(x)]) ≡ 1,
which leads to a physically equivalent situation.
Conversely, if we choose a mesh and phases for each path in the mesh (as well as the reciprocal
for the reversed path: χ([C(x)]−1) = χ−1([C(x)])), and a representation of the fundamental group
at x0, Eq. (3.40) deﬁnes a groupoid representation; let q and p be such that s(q) = a, s(p) = t (q) =
b, t (p) = c; then:

χ([q])χ([p])

26

= χ([C(a)]−1)D([C(a)qC−1(b)])χ([C(b)])χ([C(b)]−1)D([C(b)pC−1(c)])χ([C(c)])
= χ([C(a)]−1)D([C(a)qC−1(b)])χ([C(b)])χ−1([C(b)])D([C(b)pC−1(c)])χ([C(c)])
= χ([C(a)]−1)D([C(a)qC−1(b)])D([C(b)pC−1(c)])χ([C(c)])
= χ([C(a)]−1)D([C(a)qC−1(b)][C(b)pC−1(c)])χ([C(c)])
= χ([C(a)]−1)D([C(a)qpC−1(c)])χ([C(c)])
= χ([qp]).

(3.42)

In fact, this is a generalization of the notion of the choice of gauge in quantum mechanics to
multiply-connected spaces. Had this been a simply-connected space, this would be the same as
saying we had some space-dependent phase ambiguity (as then all paths between two given points
would be of the same homotopy class). More generally, there are additional degrees of freedom
having to do with representations of the fundamental group at any point, which correspond to
Aharonov-Bohm ﬂuxes for the special case of spaces which can be represented as R2 with holes.

Now, we have seen that every choice of phases for the mesh provides us with a valid groupoid
representation. We have also seen that once these phases are set for one choice of base-point and
mesh, the phases for any other choice are also set. We therefore proceed to prove that, given the
fundamental group representation, a base-point, and a mesh, the choice of phases for the mesh has
no physical eﬀect. Let us have two sets of mesh-weights, χ(•) and χ(cid:48)(•), and calculate:

χ([q]) = χ([C(a)]−1)D([C(a)qC−1(b)])χ([C(b)])

=(cid:0)χ([C(a)]−1)χ([C(b)])(cid:1) D([C(a)qC−1(b)])
=(cid:0)χ(cid:48)([C(cid:48)(a)]−1)χ(cid:48)([C(cid:48)(b)])(cid:1) D([C(cid:48)(a)qC(cid:48)−1(b)]).

χ(cid:48)([q]) = χ(cid:48)([C(cid:48)(a)]−1)D([C(cid:48)(a)qC(cid:48)−1(b)])χ(cid:48)([C(cid:48)(b)])

and:

However:

(3.43)

(3.44)

(3.45)

D([C(cid:48)(a)qC(cid:48)−1(b)]) = D([C(cid:48)(a)C−1(a)C(a)qC−1(b)C(b)C(cid:48)−1(b)])

= D([C(cid:48)(a)C−1(a)][C(a)qC−1(b)][C(b)C(cid:48)−1(b)])
= D([C(cid:48)(a)C−1(a)])D([C(a)qC−1(b)])D([C(b)C(cid:48)−1(b)])

=(cid:0)D([C(cid:48)(a)C−1(a)])D([C(b)C(cid:48)−1(b)])(cid:1) D([C(a)qC−1(b)]).

Note that the coeﬃcients in larger parentheses are independent of [q], so long as s([q]) and t ([q])
remain unchanged. Therefore, there is a phase eiδ, independent of [q], such that:

χ(cid:48)([q]) = eiδχ([q]),

(3.46)

meaning that, unless we alter the fundamental group representation, an arbitrary change in the
weights for any mesh starting from any base-point will create physically indistinguishable groupoid
representations. In particular, the choice of χ([q]) ≡ 1 in Ref. [4] is, in fact, a legitimate special
choice of gauge.
Finally, let us show that we can use this additional degree of freedom in order to directly

incorporate the symmetry of a space, by returning to the case of the punctured plane, R2 \ {0}

from the end of the last section. We will make a choice which will allow for a single phase, eiϕ,
where ϕ = φ/2 and D(1) = eiφ, for any half-circle counter-clockwise path around the origin.

27

We will (ab)use complex polar coordinates to describe points in R2 \ {0}:

reiθ (cid:44) (r cosθ, r sinθ),

where 0 ≤ θ < 2π.

Let x0 = (1, 0) = 1ei0, and the mesh be as follows (see Figure 3.3):

with the weights:

C(reiθ)(t) = (reiθ)t = rteitθ

χ(C(reiθ)) = eiφθ/2π.

(3.47)

(3.48)

(3.49)

Figure 3.3: Mesh for fundamental groupoid representation with rotational symmetry.

We will now show that, under this scheme, the amplitude of every counter-clockwise half-circle
is equal to eiφ/2. Let reiω be the starting point, and let qω be the counter-clockwise half-circle
between it and (−reiω). Then:

χ(qω) = χ([C(reiω)]−1)D([C(reiω)qωC−1(−reiω)])χ([C(−reiω)]).

(3.50)

Now, there are two possibilities: either 0 ≤ ω < π, in which case 0 ≤ ω + π < 2π, so we can write:
(3.51)

−reiω = rei(ω+π),

and:

χ(qω) = e−iφω/2πD([C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω+π))])eiφ(ω+π)/2π

= eiφπ/2πD([C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω+π))])
= eiφ/2D([C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω+π))]);

(3.52)

the path C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω+π)) is a path which starts at (1, 0), goes to (r, 0), circles to reiω, then
retraces this path back to (1, 0) (see Figure 3.4); therefore, it can be contracted to a point, and:

χ(qω) = eiφ/2 · 1 = eiφ/2.

28

(3.53)

1ei0C(0.5ei0)C(0.75eiπ/2)C(1.25e10iπ/9)The second possibility is that π ≤ ω < 2π, so 0 ≤ ω − π < π, meaning we can write:

−reiω = rei(ω−π),

so:

χ(qω) = e−iφω/2πD([C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω−π))])eiφ(ω−π)/2π

= e−iφπ/2πD([C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω−π))])
= e−iφ/2D([C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω−π))]);

(3.54)

(3.55)

the path C(reiω)qωC−1(rei(ω−π)) is a path which starts at (1, 0), goes to (r, 0), circles clockwise
to reiω, which causes it to cross the positive x-axis, and so it is only the segment beyond which it
retraces to (1, 0) (see Figure 3.5); therefore, it has winding number 1, and:

χ(qω) = e−iφ/2eiφ = eiφ/2.

(3.56)

Figure 3.4: Mesh takes a non-crossing half-circle into a contractible loop.

Therefore, in both cases, which cover all counter-clockwise half-circles, the accrued phase is eiφ/2,
as expected. Furthermore, any fundamental groupoid representation which agrees with this one
on the fundamental group is compatible with it. Finally, it embodies rotational invariance around
the origin, so it is a natural choice. In the next chapter, we will use this representation to create
distinguishable anyons.

3.3 Conclusion

In this chapter, we have found a direct derivation of the result in Ref. [79] for the Feynman
path integral in multiply-connected spaces, and generalized upon the treatment in Refs. [4, 81]
by presenting a novel way of generating the topological degrees of freedom as representations of
the fundamental groupoid. This provided a well-organized way of assigning topological phases to
paths rather than loops, which allowed us to directly incorporate the symmetry of a space into the
representation.

29

qωFigure 3.5: Mesh takes a crossing half-circle into a loop with winding number 1.

In the next chapter, we will use this result to prove the strictly topological origin of anyons. The
example of the punctured plane, running throughout this chapter, and culminating in our ability
to provide a consistent topological phase for the exchange of distinguishable particles, will prove
essential.

30

qωchapter 4

DISTINGUISHABLE AND IDENTICAL ANYONS

4.1 Distinguishable Anyons

As we have mentioned in Section 2.7, the experimental evidence for anyons in Camino et al. [37]
involves interference between diﬀerent types of particles, while that in Kim et al. [38] involves ones
of the same type. Therefore, the aim of this chapter is to establish anyonic “statistics” between
two distinguishable particles, and then to apply the results of Goyal [1] to arrive at identical
anyons. This is in contrast with approaches described in Section 2.6, where anyons were required
to be identical. Since the exchange of distinguishable particles is not a closed loop, representations
of the fundamental group, from which Ref. [5] get their topological phases, are insuﬃcient. We
will therefore make use of the result of Chapter 3, where we showed that a topologically non-trivial
space has an additional degree of freedom, which, for the case in question, corresponds to a choice
of anyonic exchange amplitude.

The focus on two particles is in the interest of concreteness and simplicity of exposition. Since
the operational results in Ref. [1] apply to an arbitrary number of particles, and since the topological
situation for many particles involves the “colored braids” (see comment in Goldin and Sharp [92]),
which are generated by two-particle exchanges, we do not expect the generalization to N > 2
particles to introduce any signiﬁcant complications.

The main assumption we must make is that the particles do not coincide. We will take
from Ref. [5] the transition from the two-particle conﬁguration space to the center of mass and
relative spaces, thus helping us focus on the latter, as the former is topologically trivial.

Let us start from the original space:

R2 × R2 \ {(r, r) | r ∈ R2}.

(4.1)

If the original variables are of the form (ra, rb), then we may deﬁne the center of mass and relative
coordinates, respectively, as (see Figure 4.1):

and:

RCoM (cid:44) rb + ra

2

In the variables (RCoM, rrel), the total space is now:

R2 ×

rrel (cid:44) rb − ra.
(cid:1) .

(cid:0)R2 \ {0}

(4.2)

(4.3)

(4.4)

The center of mass space is thus simply-connected, so all features of topological interest will

appear in the relative space, the punctured plane R2\{0}. We shall subsequently focus on physical

systems where we can perform an appropriate separation of variables, for example, those where all
interactions are between the two particles.

31

Figure 4.1: Absolute coordinates transformed into center of mass and relative coordinates.

At the end of Section 3.2, we characterized the topological degree of freedom of this very space
through representations of the fundamental groupoid of the space. Therefore, for any path x(t),
the amplitude associated with it is:

(cid:18) i

(cid:19)

A{x(t)} = χ([x(t)]) exp

S{x(t)}

,

(4.5)

where [x(t)] is the homotopy class of the path, and χ([x(t)]) is a representation of the fundamen-
tal groupoid. In this case, the representation of the fundamental group at an arbitrary point is
parameterized by the amplitude corresponding to a single rotation around the origin, eiφ, and we
can choose a groupoid representation such that the amplitude corresponding to any half-circular,
counter-clockwise path qex is:

χ([qex]) = eiϕ,

(4.6)

where ϕ = φ/2 (see Figure 4.2). For our two-particle system, this corresponds to a simple, counter-
clockwise exchange.

Figure 4.2: Both half-circle counter-clockwise exchanges result in the phase: χ([qex]) = χ([q(cid:48)ex]) =
eiϕ.

32

0rarbRCoMrrelqexq0exIf we choose to perform an exchange in the opposite direction, then the path is q−1

ex , so:

χ([q−1

ex ]) = (χ([qex]))−1 = e−iϕ

(4.7)

Generally, if we have a path which half-circles the origin k times, qΞ, we note that even if the
exchange path does not pass through either the initial or ﬁnal point other than during the start or
the end, it is homotopic to a path which does, so that the product rule can be used:

and we end up with:

χ([qΞ]) = χ([qex]k) = χ([qx])k = eikϕ.

[qΞ] = [qex]k,

(4.8)

(4.9)

Now, we have referred to this as an “exchange”, but at this point we only have a representation
for a homotopy class. An actual exchange would be a path x(t) such that [x(t)] = [qΞ], and the
exchange amplitude would be:

(cid:18) i

(cid:19)

AD
Ξ = exp

S{x(t)}

χ([x(t)]).

(4.10)

For simplicity let us treat the free-particle case:

t2ˆ

S{x(t)} =

t1

µ
2

( ˙x(t))2 dt,

meaning that if we take the quasi-static limit, S → 0, and we get:

AD
Ξ → eikϕ.

(4.11)

(4.12)

So anyonic behavior is entirely topological, having nothing to do with identical particles. In the

rest of the chapter we will combine distinguishable anyons into identical anyons.

4.2 Applying the Operational Results to Anyons

We now turn to show that identical particles can behave as anyons, in a way that is compatible with
the operational results in Ref. [1], which provide only two forms of combination of distinguishable-
particle amplitudes into identical ones, and therefore appear to only admit bosons and fermions.

Let us recall the situation for two identical particles. Suppose that we had a way of ﬁnding
the transition amplitudes for a system of two distinguishable particles, which are individually dy-
namically the same as one of the identical particles. For a single, given transition of the identical
particles, we would have two transitions of the distinguishable system that would be indistinguish-
able if we were to ignore the particle labels: an original transition II, whose amplitude is αII, and
a permuted transition X, for the situation where the two ﬁnal particle labels are permuted with
each other, whose amplitude is αX (see Figure 4.3). Then there are two possible expressions for
the total amplitude for two subsequent measurements of a system of two identical particles:

where + and − correspond to operational bosons and fermions, respectively. Note that this expres-
sion does not, at ﬁrst, seem to allow for anyons. However, as we saw in the previous section, anyonic

Atotal = H (αII, αX) = αII ± αX,

(4.13)

33

Figure 4.3: Two transitions of the distinguishable-particle system are appropriate for the same
identical-particle transition. The amplitudes are related through the function H (•,•).

behavior arises from topological considerations for distinguishable particles. So both αII and αX
separately incorporate this degree of freedom. Here we will show how these ideas are combined to
form a pair of identical anyons.

Let us write more explicit expressions for these amplitudes. We recall that we are discussing
two particles in two dimensions, which cannot coincide. Now let us see how identity translates into
the relative space. Given a pair of diﬀerent locations in R2:

ra (cid:54)= rb;

(4.14)

if (ra, rb) is, as in Section 4.1, the outcome in which the ﬁrst particle is in ra and the second is
in rb, then:

is an outcome in which one particle is found in each of these locations, without being able to
distinguish the two. By the deﬁnition of the center of mass and relative coordinates in Eq. (4.2)
and Eq. (4.3), exchanging the particles:

(ra ↔ rb)

(4.15)

translates into a transformation reversing rrel, without changing RCoM:

(ra, rb) (cid:55)→ (rb, ra)

(RCoM, rrel) (cid:55)→ (RCoM,−rrel);

(4.16)

(4.17)

see Figure 4.4. Therefore, when we focus on the relative space, distinguishable particle states may
be designated by a single relative coordinate, (rrel), while the symmetrized space may be written
as (rrel ↔ −rrel).
To simplify the notation, we can suppress the rel in the subscript, and simply use a subscript
number for time-ordering purposes. Then a measurement outcome for the distinguishable-particle
system is written as (rn), while the corresponding outcome for the identiﬁed system is (rn ↔ −rn);
however, the latter contains an ambiguity, as both (rn ↔ −rn) and (rn ↔ rn) refer to the same
outcome of the identical particle system. As we can see from Eq. (4.13), in the case of fermions,
this would lead to a multiply-deﬁned value. We therefore must choose a subspace of the punctured
plane of the “Real” (+r) values, so that they, along with the “Inverted” values (−r), cover the
In this we are borrowing
whole space. We choose: {y > 0} ∪ {y = 0, x > 0} (see Figure 4.5).
from the reduced conﬁguration space approach in Ref. [5]; note, however, that we are dealing with
particle identity after quantization, as we assume that we have amplitudes to work with from the
appropriate distinguishable-particle system.

34

abcdαIIabcdαXabcdH(αII,αX)Figure 4.4: Transposing the particles reverses rrel, while leaving RCoM unchanged.

If we then write, for two consecutive measurements indexed by 1 and 2:

for the original transition,

for the permuted transition, and:

αII = A ((r1)(r2))

αX = A ((r1)(−r2))

for the identical particle transition, we can then express Eq. (4.13) as:

Atotal = A ((r1 ↔ −r1)(r2 ↔ −r2)) ;

A ((r1 ↔ −r1)(r2 ↔ −r2)) = H(cid:0)

A ((r1)(r2)) ,A ((r1)(−r2))(cid:1)

= A ((r1)(r2)) ± A ((r1)(−r2)) .

(4.18)

(4.19)

(4.20)

(4.21)

We deﬁne the original transition to be that which stays within the “Real” subspace, while the

permuted transition crosses into the “Inverted” subspace (see Figure 4.5 again).

4.3 Exchanging Identical Anyons

4.3.1 Circular Exchanges

We turn to exchanging particles. In the ∆t → 0 limit, the only contribution to the amplitude comes
from around the classical path [93]. So let us have the particles take very short steps, in a half-arc,
around their center of mass (see Figure 4.6):

r1 = (ρ cosθ, ρ sinθ) (cid:55)→ (ρ cos(θ + ∆θ), ρ sin(θ + ∆θ)) = r1 + ρ∆θ(− sinθ, cosθ)

= r1 + ρ∆θ ˆθ;

(4.22)

we are dealing then with the ∆t → 0 limit of two distinguishable-particle amplitudes; direct:

over a classical line-segment we will call rd, and opposite:

(cid:16)
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(r1)(r1 + ρ∆θ ˆθ)

(cid:17)
(r1)(−r1 − ρ∆θ ˆθ)

Ad(θ + ∆θ, t + ∆t ; θ, t) (cid:44) A

Ao(θ + ∆θ, t + ∆t ; θ, t) (cid:44) A

35

,

(4.23)

.

(4.24)

0rarbRCoMrrela7→bb7→a0rarbRCoMrrelFigure 4.5: Complete symmetrized space is {y > 0} ∪ {y = 0, x > 0}. Unless an arbitrary choice
is made, there is an ambiguity regarding which transition is original and which is permuted. This
is resolved by deciding that the transition between r’s in “Real” space is original, while that
from “Real” to “Inverted” space is permuted.

Figure 4.6: The direct and opposite transitions for a small angular change. Note that ro does not
pass through the hole at the origin.

over a classical line-segment we will call ro.

Classically, outside the origin, the two particles are free, so in both cases we are looking at
particles moving uniformly, that is, in straight lines at constant speeds. In the case of the opposite
transition, the straight line is within the relevant space because of the slight displacement from a
diameter of the circle. For the direct transition, the velocity is:

vd =

r1 + ρ∆θ ˆθ − r1

∆t

=

ρ∆θ
∆t

ˆθ,

(4.25)

36

r1r2−r2IIorX?XorII?Ambiguityr1r2−r2IIX“Real”“Inverted”Resolutionr1−r1r1+ρ∆θˆθ−r1−ρ∆θˆθ∆θrdrowhile the velocity for the opposite transition is very diﬀerent:

2r1
∆t −
if we then take ∆t, ∆θ → 0 with ∆θ/∆t = ˙θ, a constant, then:

vo = −r1 − ρ∆θ ˆθ − r1

= −

∆t

while:

vd = ρ ˙θ ˆθ,

vo = −

2r1
∆t

.

ρ∆θ
∆t

ˆθ;

(4.26)

(4.27)

(4.28)

We will ﬁnd the misbehavior of the opposite transition’s velocity very useful in the following.
We now calculate the action functional for both cases (in this case m1 = m2 = m), using the
standard free-particle Lagrangian:

t+∆tˆ

t+∆tˆ

Sd(θ + ∆θ, t + ∆t ; θ, t) =

which is well-behaved, while:

So(θ + ∆θ, t + ∆t ; θ, t) =

m
2

v2

d =

m
2

ρ2 ˙θ2 =

m
2

ρ2 ˙θ2∆t,

(4.29)

t

t

t+∆tˆ

t

2mρ2
∆t2

dt(cid:48) =

2mρ2
∆t

(4.30)

is not. When passing to the amplitudes, recall that the distinguishable system incorporates the
fundamental groupoid representation χ(•) deﬁned in Section 4.1. Additionally, while the action
functionals are time-independent, we will want to distinguish between the respective line segments,
so we will index them:

(cid:34)

(cid:35)

Adn = χ([rdn]) exp

i

mρ2 ˙θ2

2 ∆t

(4.31)

(4.32)

and

(cid:20)

i

2mρ2
∆t

(cid:21)

.

Aon = χ([ron]) exp

Now, let us concatenate N such transitions, with N ∆t = T , N ∆θ = π, so that ˙θ = π/T , and

we create an overall exchange amplitude:

AI
Ξ = (Ad1 ±Ao1)(Ad2 ±Ao2)···(Ad[N−1] ±Ao[N−1])(AoN ±AdN );

(4.33)

the change in order in the last transition is not accidental: since it crosses out of the domain of

deﬁnition of r ↔ −r, the order of terms is then, and only then, reversed. This will always happen

an odd number of times in an overall exchange, regardless of where the line of demarcation is chosen
(see Figure 4.7).

37

Figure 4.7: Accumulation of the direct amplitudes, with illustration of the opposites. Note that in
the last transition, the direct transition, while retaining the same physical amplitude, crosses the
boundary between “real” and “inverted’ space, while the opposite transition stays within “real”
space, so that the former is “permuted” and the latter is “original”. Therefore, the total exchange
amplitude acquires a possible sign, depending on whether the particles are originally bosons (+)
or fermions (−).

Now, as seen in Eq. (4.32), Aon depends on ∆t as exp((cid:101)Ci∆t−1)/, or equivalently on N
as exp(CiN/), with C > 0. If we follow the procedure in Feynman [27] and replace  (cid:55)→ (1− iδ),
with the limit δ → 0+ to be taken after our calculations, then 1/ (cid:55)→ (1 + iδ), and:

exp(CiN/) (cid:55)→ eCiN (1+iδ)/

= eCiN/

· e−CN δ/

.

(4.34)

Therefore, in each factor of AI

Ξ, Aon will become exponentially smaller than Adn as N → ∞,
so that we can focus on the latter at the expense of the former. Another way of understanding
this mathematical trick is by noting that in the Aon, the phase varies wildly as N → ∞, so that
it will tend to cancel out, while the Adn remain manageable, and lead to a ﬁnite product among
themselves.

Therefore, we are left with the amplitude of a circular path rΞ in the positive direction:

N(cid:89)

n=1

N(cid:89)

n=1

(cid:34)

AI
Ξ = ±

Adn = ±

χ([rdn]) exp

= ±χ([rd1···rdN ]) exp

i

2 N ∆t

mρ2 ˙θ2

mρ2 ˙θ2

2 ∆t
= ±χ([rΞ])ei mπ2ρ2

2T ,

(cid:35)

(cid:34)

i

(cid:35)

(4.35)

factoring nicely to an operational factor ±, a topological factor χ([rΞ]), and a dynamical fac-
tor ei mπ2ρ2
2T . We can ﬁnally take the quasi-static limit, T → ∞, removing the dynamical factor to
ﬁnd that:
(4.36)

AI
Ξ = ±χ([rΞ]) = ±eiφ,

that is, an exchange in the positive direction multiplies by the operational coeﬃcient, as well as an
Aharonov-Bohm phase. Since −1 = eiπ, we can incorporate the operational degree of freedom into
a new phase, with angle ϕ, and we have anyons:
Ξ = eiϕ.
AI

(4.37)

38

Ad1Ad2Ad3Ad4Ad5Ad6Ad7Ad8±Ad9This was presented as a single exchange in the positive direction. The treatment in the negative
direction only requires us to choose N ∆θ = −π, and to now have the segments and the exchange
itself be in the opposite direction. Then the exchange amplitude would be:

AI
Ξ = (Ao1 ±Ad1)(Ad2 ±Ao2)···(Ad[N−1] ±Ao[N−1])(AdN ±AoN ),

(4.38)

where the change in order is now in the ﬁrst transition, which is the one crossing the line of
demarcation, despite being shorter locally (see Figure 4.8).

Figure 4.8: Situation is as for Figure 4.7, but in the reverse direction. Here it is the ﬁrst transition
in which “original” and “permuted” must be reversed.

The total amplitude would then be:

Ξrev = ±χ([rΞrev])ei mπ2ρ2
AI
or in the quasi-static limit (and noting that eiπ = e−iπ):

T = ±e−iφei mπ2ρ2

T

,

(4.39)

Generally, if one wishes to perform a k-fold exchange, then if k ≥ 0, one gets:

AI
while if k < 0, one would have:

Ξrev = e−iϕ.
AI
(cid:0)

(cid:1)k = eikϕ,
(cid:1)|k| = e−i|k|ϕ = eikϕ.

Ξ

(cid:0)

AI

Ξrev

So, for the general k-fold circular exchange:

as in Eq. (4.12).

Ξ = eikϕ,
AI

39

(4.40)

(4.41)

(4.42)

(4.43)

Ad9Ad8Ad7Ad6Ad5Ad4Ad3Ad2±Ad14.3.2 More General Paths

let us generalize further. Suppose the exchange were performed along a more general

Now,
path, r(t), such that:

r(0) = −r(T ) = x0 (cid:54)= 0.
We will still impose a few regularity conditions on this path:
it is smooth, with ﬁnite velocity,
it stays at a minimal distance ρmin > 0 from the excluded origin, and for simplicity, the angular
velocity is never zero. We choose some ∆t = T /N , and look at short steps in time:

(4.44)

rn = (ρn cosθn, ρn sinθn) (cid:55)→ rn+1 = rn + ∆ρn ˆρn + ρn∆θn
ˆθn

= rn +

˙ρn ˆρn + ρn

˙θn

∆t,

(4.45)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

ˆθn

where:

(4.46)
At the ∆t → 0 limit, the two relevant paths — which do not cross the excluded origin, as we

have speciﬁed that ˙θ (cid:54)= 0 — have the following direct straight-line velocity:

{variable}n (cid:44) {variable}(n∆t).

with the opposite velocity being:

vdn = ˙ρn ˆρn + ρn

˙θn

ˆθn,

von = −

2rn
∆t − vd;

as in Section 4.3.1, the ∆t−1 term dominates, and we may write:

2rn
∆t

.

tn+∆tˆ

tn
m
˙r2
n∆t,
2

von = −
The action functionals for the two cases are:

Sd(ρn+1, θn+1, tn+1 ; ρn, θn, tn) =

=

which is well-behaved, while:

So(ρn+1, θn+1, tn+1 ; ρn, θn, tn) =

(cid:104)

n + ρ2
˙ρ2
n

(cid:105)

˙θ2
n

dt(cid:48)

tn+∆tˆ

tn

m
2

m
2

dndt(cid:48) =
v2

tn+∆tˆ

tn

2mρ2
n
∆t2

dt(cid:48) =

2mρ2
n
∆t ≥

2mρ2
∆t

min

is not. we can then write the amplitudes more succinctly as follows:

and

Adn = χ([rdn]) exp

Aon = χ([ron]) exp

40

(cid:104)
(cid:20)

(cid:105)

(cid:21)

,

i

m
2 ˙r2

n∆t

i

4mρ2
n∆t

(4.47)

(4.48)

(4.49)

(4.50)

(4.51)

(4.52)

(4.53)

where χ(•) is deﬁned as in Section 4.3.1.

The next step is more subtle than for a simple, circular path. We have a product of mostly:

Adn ±Aon ,

(4.54)

where this is replaced by Aon ±Adn whenever we have a path segment crossing the boundary of
the region of deﬁnition of the symmetrized space. If the exchange involves k half-rotations of the
particles around each other, then there will be k such terms. Since, as in Section 4.3.1, a Aon factor
suppresses any term which contains even one instance thereof, the total amplitude of exchange is:

(cid:40)(cid:89)

(cid:41)

(cid:34)(cid:88)

Ξ = (±1)k(cid:89)

AI

Adn = (±1)k
= (±1)kχ([r])eSfree[r(t)];

n

(cid:35)

χ([rdn])

exp

n

n

i

m˙r2
n
2 ∆t

(4.55)

now, the k half-rotations have to be in the same direction, as, again, we assume ˙θ (cid:54)= 0, and the sign

of k can be taken to signify the direction of rotation, so that the total topological phase is:

χ([r]) = eikφ.

(4.56)

Finally, we can take the quasi-static limit, in which the free particle’s action functional is zero, and
we deﬁne ϕ = φ or ϕ = φ + π, depending on whether we started from a fermionic or bosonic total
amplitude, so we ﬁnd:

Ξ = eikϕ,
AI

(4.57)

which is again the same expression in Eq. (4.12), for distinguishable particles.

4.4 One Dimension Without Incidence Point

Before moving on to the discussion, we will note that the appropriate “anyonic” behavior is also
found in one dimension, without the need for symmetrizing the space prior to quantization. For two
particles in one dimension, if the incidence point is taken out, the particles cannot change places.
Therefore, αX = 0, and the total amplitude is:

A = αII;

(4.58)

that is, the situation is the same as that for distinguishable particles without incidence. Never-
theless, whether or not the particles are identical, the removal of the incidence point creates a
one-dimensional family of self-adjoint extensions for this problem, allowing for an interpolation
between fermion- and boson-like behavior on each side, as described in Ref. [5], as well as more
rigorously, and with an incorporation of Feynman path integrals, in Farhi and Gutmann [94]. The
importance of non-connectivity was originally noted by Girardeau [31].

4.5 Conclusion

In this chapter we were able to use the groupoid-based approach to quantization of multiply-
connected spaces developed in Chapter 3 to express anyonic behavior in two distinguishable par-
ticles in the path integral formalism. We then showed how to use the identical particle amplitude
combination results of Ref. [1] to turn distinguishable anyons into identical anyons. This should
put to rest the idea that anyonic behavior is intrinsically tied to particle identicality; instead, it is
a result of the topology of particles in two-dimensional space which cannot coincide.

41

HISTORICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL DISCUSSION OF PARTICLE IDENTITY

chapter 5

Now that we have shown that anyonic behavior is a topological phenomenon rather than having
to do with identical particles, let us look back at the historical development of this issue, compare
it to our own results in Chapter 4, and see why anyons and identicality are so often intertwined in
the literature.

All theoretical discussions and most experimental papers which use anyons see the origins of
their topic in Leinaas and Myrheim [5]. In that paper, the original, classical conﬁguration space of
a set of identical particles was symmetrized: coordinates connected by a permutation were simply
identiﬁed, and the resulting, non-Euclidean space, was quantized. They noted that this quantization
would be diﬃcult if the incidence points were retained, as the symmetrized space would then not be
a manifold, so they took them out. They then found that in two dimensions, the path of exchange
between particles, not just the fact that they are exchanged, matters. Not every two paths can
be continuously deformed into each other, so that the space has become multiply-connected. This
makes it the ﬁrst paper to make use of the fact that the conﬁguration space for two non-intersecting
particles in two dimensions is multiply-connected, and the result was anyonic behavior.

The reduced conﬁguration space project itself came about as a response to several issues raised
with the way identical particles were tackled at the time: criticism in Mirman [29], which noted that
particle labels are physically meaningless, and therefore should be abandoned in a more rigorous
theory; the existence of the Gibbs paradox [65], showing that it is necessary to reduce the size of
the conﬁguration space of a system of indistinguishable particles by the number of permutations
even in classical systems; and, most importantly, the seeming arbitrariness of the Symmetrization
Postulate (see Section 2.5). Ref. [5] decided to resolve all of these issues in one fell swoop, by
imposing the identity of particles on a classical system, and then proceeding to quantize it with the
tools dedicated to geometrically or topologically non-trivial spaces, with the hope that something
like the symmetrization postulate would come up naturally. The failure of this program in two
dimensions led to the discovery of anyons.

However, as we have seen in Section 4.1, anyons can be dealt with without referring to the
reduced conﬁguration space project, or indeed, to identical particles at all, and this has already been
recognized in the past. Ref. [5] was published in 1977; as early as 1985, we already ﬁnd Goldin et al.
[39] pointing out that unusual phases on exchange are possible even for distinguishable particles in
two dimensions, since it is the connectivity of the space, rather than the identity of the particles,
that is relevant. Zee [42], in notes from a conference in 1994, acknowledges that the “statistics”
involved here can be generated from a phase interaction between the particles, rather than by
requiring them to be a type of identical particles.

Despite these early admissions of the separability of anyons from particle identity, the vast
majority of papers and reviews which were aware of either Ref. [5] or Wilczek [30] (which cited the
former while popularizing the term “anyon”), introduced the issue in the context of the reduced
conﬁguration space, even though in many cases they proceeded to use a particle-ﬂux composite or
Chern-Simons potential when performing calculations [40, 46, 95, 96].

Ref. [30] itself represents a clear hybrid phenomenon. On the one hand, the two-anyon case
is treated with an Aharonov-Bohm potential, without using a reduced conﬁguration space. On
the other hand, the generalization to N > 2 particles is said to be diﬃcult because the reduced
conﬁguration space would then become more complicated. More recently, Nayak et al. [97], while

42

starting out with reduced conﬁguration space ideas, acknowledge that there could be many diﬀerent
“types” of anyons, with arbitrary phases accrued by twisting them around each other, implicitly
admitting non-identical anyons. They, with Zee [42], accepted that what is presented as “statistics”
of anyons could be instead understood as a special kind of interaction.

Another curious phenomenon is the fact that none of the papers or books cited above seem to
seriously address the geometrical (rather than topological) consequences of reducing the conﬁgu-
ration space in two dimensions. As noted in Ref. [5], the reduced space is equivalent to that of a
cone, which has non-zero curvature at the origin. Had this been important, we would expect to
ﬁnd many more citations and discussions of works dealing with this kind of system1.

So the conceptual question is why, despite the fact that the reduced conﬁguration space approach
is ill-suited to applications, and would lead to fundamental additional problems if taken seriously,
is it nevertheless invoked without causing any practical problems?

The solution involves a tool essential for the conventional quantization of multiply-connected
spaces: the use of covering spaces (see Figure 5.1; for a more extensive discussion, see Singer and
Thorpe [77]). These are spaces that are themselves simply-connected, contain several copies of the
underlying multiply-connected space, properly patched together, and which project in a canonical
manner down to the space in question. A wave-function or propagator is calculated for the covering
space, and then further restricted so that the existence of a space larger than the physical space
cannot be detected. While one may cite Laidlaw and DeWitt-Morette [4] as bucking this trend, the
more elaborate development of this work in Laidlaw [81] concedes that the covering space approach
is necessary in order to make any meaningful calculations, and from Dowker [82] on, this is the
method normally used2.

Figure 5.1: X∗ is the covering space of X. x∗i all project to the same x.

The relevance of this issue can be found in French and Krause [105], through an analysis of an
argument between Gr¨unbaum [106] and Stein [107, 108]. The salient point is that the passage to

1This is usually known as the “cosmic string”; see Refs. [98–102] for in-depth discussion.
2The other two resolutions in the literature are the use of multivalued functions and of ﬁber bundles. Multivalued
functions themselves are best accommodated through the universal covering space [103], or its complex function
analogue, the Riemann surface [104], while ﬁber bundles are a diﬀerent form of covering space, and in any event, are
applied to the non-symmetrized, electromagnetic problem anyway [41].

43

XX∗x∗1x∗2x∗3xa covering space is not innocent. We see this most clearly when we look at Ref. [5]’s treatment
of the three-dimensional quantum case. After going to the trouble of removing the origin and
identifying exchanged point, the symmetrization postulate in three dimensions is retrieved by using
the universal covering space, which, since the conﬁguration space is now doubly-connected, is a
doubling-up of the reduced space: in other words, the original space, unnecessary particle labels and
all. In two dimensions the situation is more diﬃcult, but there is nothing preventing a practitioner
from “unreducing” the conﬁguration space to that of distinguishable particles before applying the
tools needed to deal with an Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect. We ourselves approached this topologically
in Section 4.1. Previous treatments sometimes involved a universal covering space, but this special
case is more easily handled through a composite ﬂux or or Chern-Simons ﬁeld, instead [40, 41]. Most
importantly for our argument, these tools do not concern themselves with whether the particles
are intrinsically identical. Identity can be imposed in parallel or in concert with these other tools.
We can also see evidence for the work that the covering space implicitly performs by asking
why issues of curvature hardly arise. Indeed, while the symmetrized space of two particles in two
dimensions is, in fact, a cone, and thus has a non-trivial curvature at the removed origin, the
particular form of the cone belongs to a family of special cases. In these special cases, the reduced
range of the azimuthal angle is a whole fraction of 2π [98, 101]. These special cases are equivalent
to solving the problem in a ﬂat space, and then imposing an n-fold symmetry condition on the
probability density: that is, requiring that |Ψ(ρ, θ + 2π/n)| = |Ψ(ρ, θ)|. For the relative space of
two particles in two dimensions, this is seen to be equivalent to the classical way of deriving the
symmetrization postulate.

The basic idea of approaching identical particles from Refs. [1, 2] completely sidesteps any
criticism of the legitimacy of using particle labels, and does not result in a curved conﬁguration
space.
Instead, it assumes that a certain problem has been solved for distinguishable particles,
that is, with particle labels, and sees what consistent ways there are to combine these solutions
into a solution to the identiﬁed system. So it is compatible both with the idea that particle labels
are necessary, but then suppressed, and with the idea that there is a useful covering space using
particle labels which can be harnessed for the purpose of also dealing with identical particles.

To conclude, we challenged the fundamental impetus for the reduced conﬁguration space ap-
proach, namely that quantization after symmetrizing the space is more natural because it removes
the need for using unphysical labels, by showing that successful quantization in the reduced space
requires the addition of redundant structure, so that one unmeasurable family of parameters is
exchanged with another. Reﬂecting on the results in Chapter 4, we found that this is also not
necessary in order to provide the additional richness that is anyonic behavior.

44

chapter 6

CONCLUSION

We began our research asking whether the Symmetrization Postulate was valid. The results in Neori
and Goyal [2], and their generalization in Goyal [1], only leave room for bosons and fermions.

On its surface, this seemed to run counter to the existence of anyons, which interpolate between
bosons and fermions. Since there are theoretical models as well as physical evidence standing
behind anyons, we were not satisﬁed to simply rule them out. Instead, we investigated the issue
of identical particles in two dimensions. We found that the apparent paradox stems from the
aforementioned assumption that anyons must be identical, when this is demonstrably not the
case. We discovered a novel approach for quantization in general multiply-connected spaces using
the fundamental groupoid, which is based upon the concatenation of classes of paths, rather than
loops. This allowed us to provide consistent topological amplitudes for exchanges of distinguishable
particles, which lead us to distinguishable anyons. Using the operational results from Ref. [1], we
showed that the resulting probability amplitudes can then be combined to form identical anyons.
Looking to future work, there are at least two important issues that have not yet been resolved,

and await further developments.

The ﬁrst is the question of paraparticles. While the operational formalism, with the assumptions
we added to incorporate identical particles into it, rules them out, it would be interesting to see
what would be needed to change in order to allow for them. One possibility is to weaken atomic
measurements so we would allow additional parameters, which cannot be directly measured. That
may result in vectors of numbers needed to express a measurement, rather than a single parameter,
leading to the possibility of unitary operators instead of numerical amplitudes. Similar work will
be needed to incorporate measurable internal degrees of freedom such as spin, so it may well be
a good exercise even if it does not result in paraparticles. Additionally, generalizing the groupoid
results to multiple-dimensional representations may have applications to non-abelian anyons, of the
form used in topological quantum computing [97].

Another issue is the removal of incidence points. This is a recurring problem in the literature.
The operational results are general, meaning that they should apply even to particles with small,
discrete conﬁguration spaces. In those situations, particle incidence become a signiﬁcant part of
the space, and a serious challenge for bosons, which should be able to occupy them in an unlimited
manner. We hope future work will resolve these issues.

Finally, a potentially minor point regarding our anyon proofs: strictly speaking, we only dis-
cussed systems with two anyons, and have not generalized to any number of particles. However,
since the operational results do generalize, and since the braid group, which forms the foundation
for anyonic behavior, is generated by individual exchanges, we do not expect there to be serious
challenges when more than two particles are involved.

45

APPENDIX: GROUPOID SOURCE AND TARGET PROOF

Let us show that any groupoid will have s and t functions as described in Chapter 3.

Minimally, a groupoid is a set with a sometimes-deﬁned operation, satisfying:

(I) If (ab)c is deﬁned then, in particular, ab is deﬁned; futhermore, a(bc) is deﬁned, so that bc is

also deﬁned. Finally, (ab)c = a(bc).

(II) For each a there is always a a−1 such that aa−1 and a−1a are deﬁned, and:

(i) (a−1a)b = b when ab is deﬁned
(ii) (aa−1)b = b when a−1b is deﬁned
(iii) b(aa−1) = b when ba is deﬁned
(iv) b(a−1a) = b when ba−1 is deﬁned

If we replace (II) by a weaker condition:

(II(cid:48)) For each a there are a−1

L and a−1

R such that a−1

L a and aa−1

R are deﬁned, and:

(i(cid:48)) (a−1
(ii(cid:48)) b(aa−1

L a)b = b when ab is deﬁned
R ) = b when ba is deﬁned

we can retrieve it as follows. We note that:

L = a−1
a−1

L (aa−1

R ) = (a−1

L a)a−1

R = a−1
R ,

(A.1)

L = a−1

so a−1
and we ﬁnd that:

R and we can write both as a−1, giving us (i) and (iii). Now, there also exists a (a−1)−1,

a = a(a−1(a−1)−1) = (aa−1)(a−1)−1 = (a−1)−1,

and we get (ii) and (iv). (cid:4)

Now, let us deﬁne:

t (a) = {b : ab is deﬁned}
s(b) = {c : c−1b is deﬁned} = t (b−1).

(A.2)

(A.3)

(A.4)

We can prove that t (a) = s(b) iﬀ ab is deﬁned. Note that a−1 = t (a), since aa−1 is deﬁned,
and b ∈ s(b), since b−1b is deﬁned. Then:
⇒: If t (a) = s(b), then b ∈ t (a), so ab is deﬁned.
⇐: If ab is deﬁned, then:

⊆: If c ∈ t (a) then ac is deﬁned, so a(cc−1) = a is deﬁned, and:

ab = (a(cc−1))b = a((cc−1)b) = a(c(c−1b)),

(A.5)

meaning c−1b is deﬁned, so c ∈ s(b).

46

Therefore, t (a) = s(b).

⊇: If c ∈ s(b) then c−1b is deﬁned, so (cc−1)b = b is deﬁned, and:

ab = a((cc−1)b) = (a(cc−1))b = ((ac)c−1)b,

(A.6)

meaning ac is deﬁned, so c ∈ t (a).

And we are done. (cid:4)

47

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[1]

P. Goyal. Informational approach to the quantum symmetrization postulate. New J. Phys.,
17(1):013043, 2015. doi: 10.1088/1367-2630/17/1/013043. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1367-2630/17/1/013043. Preprint: http://arxiv.org/abs/1309.0478.

[2] K. H. Neori and P. Goyal. On the origin of the quantum rules for identical particles. AIP
Conf. Proc., 1553(1):220–227, 2013. doi: 10.1063/1.4820003. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1063/1.4820003. Preprint: http://arxiv.org/abs/1211.1994.

[3]

J.-M. Souriau. Quantiﬁcation g´eom´etrique. Applications. Ann. Inst. H. P. Sec. A, 6(4):
311–341, 1967. URL http://eudml.org/doc/75556.

[4] M. G. G. Laidlaw and C. DeWitt-Morette. Feynman functional integrals for systems of
indistinguishable particles. Phys. Rev. D, 3(6):1375–1378, 1971. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.3.
1375. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.3.1375.

[5]

J. M. Leinaas and J. Myrheim. On the theory of identical particles. Nuovo Cimento B, 37
(1):1–23, 1977. doi: 10.1007/BF02727953. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02727953.

[6] K. H. Neori and P. Goyal. Anyons in the operational formalism. AIP Conf. Proc., 1641:
189–196, 2015. doi: 10.1063/1.4905978. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4905978.
Preprint: http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.8080.

[7] K. H. Neori and P. Goyal. Fundamental groupoids in quantum mechanics: a new approach
to quantization in multiply-connected spaces. Submitted to J. Phys. A. Preprint: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1501.00231, 2015.

[8] K. H. Neori and P. Goyal. Distinguishable and identical anyons. In preparation, 2015.

[9]

P. A. M. Dirac. On the Theory of Quantum Mechanics. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lon. Ser. A,
112(762):661–677, 1926. doi: 10.1098/rspa.1926.0133. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rspa.1926.0133.

[10] W. Heisenberg. Mehrk¨orperproblem und Resonanz in der Quantenmechanik. Z. Phys., 38
(6–7):411–426, 1926. ISSN 0044-3328. doi: 10.1007/BF01397160. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/BF01397160.

[11] E. P. Wigner.

¨Uber nicht kombinierende Terme in der neueren Quantentheorie.

Z.
Phys., 40(7):492–500, 1927. doi: 10.1007/BF01440826. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF01440826.

[12] E. P. Wigner. ¨Uber nicht kombinierende Terme in der neueren Quantentheorie. II Teil. Z.
Phys., 40(11):883–892, 1927. doi: 10.1007/BF01390906. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/BF01390906.

[13] W. Pauli. General Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Springer-Verlag, 1980.

48

[14] P. A. M. Dirac. Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford University Press, 1 edition, 1930.

[15] G. Gentile, Jr. Osservazioni sopra le statistiche intermedie. Nuovo Cimento, 17(10):493–497,

1940. doi: 10.1007/BF02960187. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02960187.

[16] H. S. Green. A generalized method of ﬁeld quantization. Phys. Rev., 90(2):270–273, 1953.

doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.90.270. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.90.270.

[17] J. M. Jauch. Systems of observables in quantum mechanics. Helv. Phys. Acta, 33(8):711–726,

1960. doi: 10.5169/seals-113092. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.5169/seals-113092.

[18] J. M. Jauch and B. Misra. Supersymmetries and essential observables. Helv. Phys. Acta,
34(6–7):699–709, 1961. doi: 10.5169/seals-113193. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.5169/
seals-113193.

[19] A. Galindo, A. Morales, and R. Nu˜nez-Lagos. Superselection principle and pure states of
n-identical particles. J. Math. Phys., 3(2):324–328, 1962. doi: 10.1063/1.1703808. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1703808.

[20] D. Pandres, Jr. Derivation of admissibility conditions for wave functions from general
quantum-mechanical principles. J. Math. Phys., 3(2):305–308, 1962. doi: 10.1063/1.1703804.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1703804.

[21] A. M. L. Messiah and O. W. Greenberg. Symmetrization postulate and its experimental
foundation. Phys. Rev., 136(1B):248–267, 1964. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.B248. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.136.B248.

[22] O. W. Greenberg. Spin and unitary-spin independence in a paraquark model of baryons and
mesons. Phys. Rev. Lett., 13(20):598–602, 1964. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.598. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.598.

[23] O. W. Greenberg. The origin of quark color. Phys. Today, 68(1):33–37, 2015. doi: 10.1063/

PT.3.2655. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/PT.3.2655.

[24] O. W. Greenberg and D. Zwanziger. Saturation in triplet models of hadrons. Phys. Rev., 150
(4):1177–1180, 1966. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.150.1177. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRev.150.1177.

[25] O. W. Greenberg. Particles with small violations of Fermi or Bose statistics. Phys. Rev.
D, 43(12):4111–4120, 1991. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.43.4111. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevD.43.4111.

[26] Y. Tikochinsky. From single-particle states to n-particle states. Phys. Rev. A, 37(9):3553–
3556, 1988. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.37.3553. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.
37.3553.

[27] R. P. Feynman. Space-time approach to non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod.
Phys., 20(2):367–387, 1948. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.20.367. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1103/RevModPhys.20.367.

[28] P. Goyal, K. H. Knuth, and J. Skilling. Origins of complex quantum amplitudes and
Feynman’s rules. Phys. Rev. A, 81(2):022109, 2010. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.81.022109.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.81.022109. Preprint: http://arxiv.org/
abs/0907.0909.

49

[29] R. Mirman. Experimental meaning of the concept of identical particles. Nuovo Cimento
B, 18(1):110–122, 1973. doi: 10.1007/BF02832643. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF02832643.

[30] F. Wilczek. Quantum mechanics of fractional-spin particles. Phys. Rev. Lett., 49(14):957–959,
1982. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.957. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
49.957.

[31] M. D. Girardeau. Permutation symmetry of many-particle wave functions. Phys. Rev.,
139(2B):B500–B508, 1965. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.139.B500. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRev.139.B500.

[32] D. C. Tsui, H. L. Stormer, and A. C. Gossard. Two-dimensional magnetotransport in the
extreme quantum limit. Phys. Rev. Lett., 48(22):1559–1562, 1982. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
48.1559. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.48.1559.

[33] R. B. Laughlin. Anomalous quantum Hall eﬀect: an incompressible quantum ﬂuid with
fractionally charged excitations. Phys. Rev. Lett., 50(18):1395–1398, 1983. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.50.1395. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.50.1395.

[34] D. Arovas, J. R. Schrieﬀer, and F. Wilczek. Fractional statistics and the quantum Hall
eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett., 53(7):722–723, 1984. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.53.722. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.53.722.

[35] H. L. Stormer. Nobel Lecture: The fractional quantum Hall eﬀect. Rev. Mod. Phys., 71
(4):875–889, 1999. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.71.875. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
RevModPhys.71.875.

[36] R. B. Laughlin. Nobel Lecture: Fractional quantization. Rev. Mod. Phys., 71(4):863–874,
1999. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.71.863. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.
71.863.

[37] F. E. Camino, W. Zhou, and V. J. Goldman. Realization of a Laughlin quasiparticle in-
terferometer: observation of fractional statistics. Phys. Rev. B, 72(7):075342, 2005. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevB.72.075342. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.72.075342.

[38] E.-A. Kim, M. Lawler, S. Vishveshwara, and E. Fradkin. Signatures of fractional statistics in
noise experiments in quantum hall ﬂuids. Phys. Rev. Lett., 95(17):176402, 2005. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.95.176402. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.176402.

[39] G. A. Goldin, R. Menikoﬀ, and D. H. Sharp. Comments on “General theory for quan-
tum statistics in two dimensions”. Phys. Rev. Lett., 54(11):603–603, 1985. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.54.603. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.54.603.

[40] A. Lerda. Anyons: Quantum Mechanics of Particles with Fractional Statistics. Springer-

Verlag, 1992.

[41] G. Morandi. The Role of Topology in Classical and Quantum Physics. Springer-Verlag, 1992.

[42] A. Zee. Quantum Hall ﬂuids. In H. B. Geyer, editor, Field Theory, Topology and Condensed
Matter Physics, volume 456 of Lecture Notes in Physics, pages 99–153. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, 1995. doi: 10.1007/BFb0113369. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0113369.

50

[43] E. C. G. Sudarshan, T. D. Imbo, and C. Shah-Imbo. Topological and algebraic aspects
of quantization: symmetries and statistics. Ann. Inst. H. P., 49(3):387–396, 1988. URL
http://eudml.org/doc/76427.

[44] L. S. Schulman. Homotopy and statistics: of spin and diagonals. J. Phys. A, 26(20):
L1093–L1097, 1993. doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/26/20/006. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/0305-4470/26/20/006.

[45] Y.-S. Wu. General theory for quantum statistics in two-dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 52(24):
2103–2106, 1984. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.52.2103. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.52.2103.

[46] A. Stern. Anyons and the quantum Hall eﬀect — A pedagogical review. Ann. Phys. (N. Y.),
323(1):204–249, 2008. doi: 10.1016/j.aop.2007.10.008. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.aop.2007.10.008. Preprint: http://arxiv.org/abs/0711.4697.

[47] M. Born. Zur Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorg¨ange. Z. Phys., 37(12):863–867, 1926. ISSN

0044-3328. doi: 10.1007/BF01397477. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01397477.

[48] N. Bohr. Causality and Complementarity. Philos. Sci., 4(3):289–298, 1937. ISSN 00318248.

doi: 10.1086/286465. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/286465.

[49] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen. Can quantum-mechanical description of physical
reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev., 47(10):777–780, 1935. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.47.
777. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.47.777.

[50] W. Pauli. ¨Uber den Zusammenhang des Abschlusses der Elektronengruppen im Atom mit der
Komplexstruktur der Spektren. Z. Phys., 31(1):765–783, 1925. doi: 10.1007/BF02980631.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02980631.

[51] S. N. Bose. Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese. Z. Phys., 26(1):178–181, 1924. doi:

10.1007/BF01327326. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01327326.

[52] A. Einstein. Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases. Sitzungsberichte Preussiche
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Physikalisch–Mathematische Klasse, pages 261–67, 1924. URL
http://web.physik.rwth-aachen.de/~meden/boseeinstein/einstein1924.pdf.

[53] D. Bohm. A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden” variables.
I. Phys. Rev., 85(2):166–179, 1952. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.85.166. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRev.85.166.

[54] D. Bohm. A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden” variables.
II. Phys. Rev., 85(2):180–193, 1952. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.85.180. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRev.85.180.

[55] E. Nelson. Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation from Newtonian mechanics. Phys. Rev., 150
(4):1079–1085, 1966. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.150.1079. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRev.150.1079.

[56] J. S. Bell. On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics (N.Y.), 1(3):195–200, 1964.

URL http://philoscience.unibe.ch/documents/TexteHS10/bell1964epr.pdf.

51

[57] S. B. Kochen and E. Specker. The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Indiana
Univ. Math. J., 17(1):59–87, 1968.
ISSN 0022-2518. doi: 10.1007/978-94-010-1795-4 17.
URL http://www.iumj.indiana.edu/IUMJ/fulltext.php?year=1968&volume=17&artid=
17004.

[58] L. Hardy. Quantum theory from ﬁve reasonable axioms. Unpublished. Preprint: http:

//arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0101012, 2001.

[59] A. Caticha. Entropic dynamics, time and quantum theory. J. Phys. A, 44(22):225303, 2011.
doi: 10.1088/1751-8113/44/22/225303. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1751-8113/44/
22/225303.

[60] Y. Tikochinsky. On the generalized multiplication and addition of complex numbers. J. Math.
Phys., 29(2):398–399, 1988. doi: 10.1063/1.528026. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.
528026.

[61] Y. Tikochinsky. Feynman rules for probability amplitudes. Int. J. Theor. Phys., 27(5):543–
549, 1988. ISSN 0020-7748. doi: 10.1007/BF00668836. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF00668836.

[62] A. Caticha. Consistency, amplitudes, and probabilities in quantum theory. Phys. Rev. A, 57
(3):1572–1582, 1998. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.57.1572. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevA.57.1572.

[63] R. T. Cox. Probability, frequency and reasonable expectation. Am. J. Phys., 14(1):1–13,

1946. doi: 10.1119/1.1990764. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1119/1.1990764.

[64] Y. Tikochinsky and S. F. Gull. Consistency, amplitudes and probabilities in quantum theory.
J. Phys. A, 33(31):5615–5618, 2000. doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/33/31/314. URL http://dx.
doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/33/31/314.

[65] J. W. Gibbs. Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics, chapter XV. Dover Publications,

Inc, New York, New York, 1960.

[66] G. Bacciagaluppi and A. Valentini. Quantum Theory at the Crossroads: Reconsidering the

1927 Solvay Conference. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

[67] L. S. Schulman. Approximate topologies. J. Math. Phys., 12(2):304–308, 1971. doi: 10.1063/

1.1665592. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1665592.

[68] T. D. Imbo, C. Shah-Imbo, R. S. Mahajan, and E. C. G. Sudarshan. A user’s guide to ex-
otic statistics. Preliminary draft. Preprint: http://wildcard.ph.utexas.edu/~sudarshan/
pub/Unpu_061.pdf, ca. 1989.

[69] E. H. Hall. On a new action of the magnet on electric currents. Am. J. Math., 2(3):287–292,
1879. ISSN 00029327. doi: 10.2307/2369245. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2369245.

[70] K. von Klitzing, G. Dorda, and M. Pepper. New method for high-accuracy determination of
the ﬁne-structure constant based on quantized hall resistance. Phys. Rev. Lett., 45(6):494–497,
1980. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.45.494. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
45.494.

52

[71] R. B. Laughlin. Quantized motion of three two-dimensional electrons in a strong magnetic
ﬁeld. Phys. Rev. B, 27(6):3383–3389, 1983. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.27.3383. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.27.3383.

[72] B. I. Halperin. Statistics of quasiparticles and the hierarchy of fractional quantized Hall
states. Phys. Rev. Lett., 52(18):1583–1586, 1984. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.52.1583. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.52.1583.

[73] B. I. Halperin. Statistics of Quasiparticles and the Hierarchy of Fractional Quantized Hall
States. Phys. Rev. Lett., 52(26):2390, 1984. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.52.2390.4. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.52.2390.4. Erratum.

[74] Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm. Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials in the quantum theory.
Phys. Rev., 115(3):485–491, 1959. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.115.485. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRev.115.485.

[75] W. Ehrenberg and R. E. Siday. The refractive index in electron optics and the principles
of dynamics. Proc. Phys. Soci. Sec. B, 62(1):8–21, 1949. doi: 10.1088/0370-1301/62/1/303.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0370-1301/62/1/303.

[76] E. H. Spanier. Algebraic Topology. Springer-Verlag, 1981.

[77]

I. M. Singer and J. A. Thorpe. Lecture Notes on Elementary Topology and Geometry. Scott,
Foresman and Company, Glenview, Illinois, 1967.

[78] P. J. Higgins. Notes on Categories and Groupoids. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1971.

URL http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/7/tr7abs.html.

[79] L. S. Schulman. A path integral for spin. Phys. Rev., 176(5):1558–1569, 1968. doi: 10.1103/

PhysRev.176.1558. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.176.1558.

[80] L. S. Schulman. A Path Integral for Spin. PhD thesis, Princeton University, 1967.

[81] M. G. G. Laidlaw. Quantum Mechanics in Multiply Connected Spaces. PhD thesis, University

of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 1971.

[82] J. S. Dowker. Quantum mechanics and ﬁeld theory on multiply connected and on homo-
geneous spaces. J. Phys. A, 5(7):936–943, 1972. doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/5/7/004. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/5/7/004.

[83] J. S. Dowker and R. Critchley. Vacuum stress tensor in an Einstein universe. Finite temper-
ature eﬀects. Phys. Rev. D, 15(6):1484–1493, 1977. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.15.1484. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.15.1484.

[84] G. Casati and I. Guarneri. The Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect from the ‘hydrodynamical’ viewpoint.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 42(24):1579–1581, 1979. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.42.1579. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.42.1579.

[85] C. C. Gerry and V. A. Singh. Feynman path integral approach to the Aharonov-Bohm
eﬀect. Phys. Rev. D, 20(10):2550–2554, 1979. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.20.2550. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.20.2550.

53

[86] P. A. Horv´athy. Quantisation in multiply connected spaces . Phys. Lett. A, 76(1):11–14,
1980. ISSN 0375-9601. doi: 10.1016/0375-9601(80)90133-4. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/0375-9601(80)90133-4.

[87] P. A. Horv´athy. Prequantization from path integral viewpoint.

In H.-D. Doebner, S. I.
Andersson, and H. R. Petry, editors, Diﬀerential Geometric Methods in Mathematical Physics,
volume 905 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 197–206. Springer-Verlag, 1980. doi:
10.1007/BFb0092438. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0092438.

[88] P. A. Horv´athy. Classical action, the Wu-Yang phase factor and prequantization. In P. L.
Garc´ıa, A. P´erez-Rend´on, and J.-M. Souriau, editors, Diﬀerential Geometrical Methods in
Mathematical Physics, volume 836 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 67–90, 1980. doi:
10.1007/BFb0089727. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0089727.

[89] C. J. Isham. Topological and global aspects of quantum theory. In B. S. DeWitt and R. Stora,
editors, Relativity, Groups and Topology II, volume 40 of Les Houches, pages 1059–1290.
North-Holland, 1984.

[90] J. S. Dowker. Remarks on non-standard statistics. J. Phys. A, 18(18):3521–3530, 1985. doi:
10.1088/0305-4470/18/18/015. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/18/18/015.

[91] B. Gaveau, A. M. Nounou, and L. S. Schulman. Homotopy and path integrals in the time-
dependent Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect. Found. Phys., 41(9):1462–1474, 2011. ISSN 0015-9018.
doi: 10.1007/s10701-011-9559-y. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10701-011-9559-y.

[92] G. A. Goldin and D. H. Sharp. The diﬀeomorphism group approach to anyons.

Int. J.
Mod. Phys. B, 5(16–17):2625–2640, 1991. doi: 10.1142/S0217979291001048. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0217979291001048.

[93] C. DeWitt-Morette. L’int´egrale fonctionnelle de Feynman. Une introduction. Ann. Inst. H.

P. Sec. A, 11(2):153–206, 1969. URL http://eudml.org/doc/75637.

[94] E. Farhi and S. Gutmann. The functional integral on the half line. Int. J. Mod. Phys. A,
5(15):3029–3052, 1990. doi: 10.1142/S0217751X90001422. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1142/S0217751X90001422.

[95] F. Wilczek. Fractional Statistics and Anyon Superconductivity. World Scientiﬁc, 1990.

[96] A. Khare. Fractional Statistics and Quantum Theory. World Scientiﬁc, 1997.

[97] C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman, and S. Das Sarma. Non-Abelian anyons and
topological quantum computation. Rev. Mod. Phys., 80(3):1083–1159, 2008. doi: 10.1103/
RevModPhys.80.1083. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.80.1083.

[98] J. S. Dowker. Quantum ﬁeld theory on a cone. J. Phys. A, 10(1):115–124, 1977. doi:

10.1088/0305-4470/10/1/023. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/10/1/023.

[99] S. Deser, R. Jackiw, and G. ’t Hooft. Three-dimensional Einstein gravity: Dynamics of
ISSN 0003-4916. doi: 10.1016/

ﬂat space. Ann. Phys. (N. Y.), 152(1):220–235, 1984.
0003-4916(84)90085-X. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0003-4916(84)90085-X.

54

[100] G. ’t Hooft. Non-perturbative 2 particle scattering amplitudes in 2 + 1 dimensional quantum
gravity. Commun. Math. Phys., 117(4):685–700, 1988. doi: 10.1007/BF01218392. URL
http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104161824.

[101] S. Deser and R. Jackiw. Classical and quantum scattering on a cone. Commun. Math.
Phys., 118(3):495–509, 1988. doi: 10.1007/BF01466729. URL https://projecteuclid.
org/euclid.cmp/1104162096.

[102] B. S. Kay and U. M. Studer. Boundary conditions for quantum mechanics on cones and
ﬁelds around cosmic strings. Commun. Math. Phys., 139(1):103–139, 1991. doi: 10.1007/
BF02102731. URL https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104203138.

[103] P. A. Horv´athy, G. Morandi, and E. C. G. Sudarshan. Inequivalent quantizations in multiply
connected spaces. Nuovo Cimento D, 11(1–2):201–228, 1989. doi: 10.1007/BF02450240. URL
http://wildcard.ph.utexas.edu/~sudarshan/pub/1989_005.pdf.

[104] S. G. Krantz. A Guide to Complex Variables, volume 1 of MAA Guides. The Mathematical

Association of America, 2008.

[105] S. French and D. Krause.

Identity in Physics: A Historical, Philosophical, and Formal

Analysis. Oxford University Press, 2006.

[106] A. Gr¨unbaum. Absolute and relational theories of space and space-time. In Earman et al.

[109], pages 303–373. URL http://mcps.umn.edu/assets/pdf/8.11_Grunbaum.pdf.

[107] H. Stein. Some philosophical prehistory of general relativity. In Earman et al. [109], pages

3–49. URL http://mcps.umn.edu/assets/pdf/8.1_stein.pdf.

[108] H. Stein. On space-time and ontology: extracts from a letter to Adolf Gr¨unbaum. In Earman

et al. [109], pages 374–402. URL http://mcps.umn.edu/assets/pdf/8.12_Stein.pdf.

[109] J. Earman, C. Glymour, and J. Stachel, editors. Foundations of Space-Time Theories, vol-
ume 8 of Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 1977. University of Minnesota Press.
URL http://mcps.umn.edu/philosophy/completeVol8.html.

55

