6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
1
9
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the relation between measurement outcomes and physical properties

Taiki Nii, Masataka Iinuma, and Holger F. Hofmann∗

Graduate School of Advanced Sciences of Matter, Hiroshima University,

Kagamiyama 1-3-1, Higashi Hiroshima 739-8530, Japan

One of the most diﬃcult problems in quantum mechanics is the analysis of the measurement
processes. In this paper, we point out that many of these diﬃculties originate from the diﬀerent
roles of measurement outcomes and observable quantities, which cannot simply be identiﬁed with
each other. Our analysis shows that the Hilbert space formalism itself describes a fundamental
separation between quantitative properties and qualitative outcomes that needs to be taken into
account in an objective description of quantum measurements. We derive fundamental relations
between the statistics of measurement outcomes and the values of physical quantities that explain
how the objective properties of a quantum system appear in the context of diﬀerent measurement
interactions. Our results indicate that non-classical correlations can be understood in terms of the
actual role of physical properties as quantiﬁable causes of the external eﬀects observed in a quantum
measurement.

PACS numbers: 03.65.Ta, 03.65.Ca, 42.50.Lc

I.

INTRODUCTION

The problem with quantum mechanics is that it does not provide a satisfactory justiﬁcation of the mathematical
elements of the theory in terms of the actual physics happening in the laboratory. The reason for this irritating
failure is that the notions used to connect the theory to the physics are hardly ever discussed. One might go so far
as to say that physicists have adapted to the situation by accepting the connection between technical procedures and
mathematical expressions “on faith”. Very often, this failure to address the empirical justiﬁcation of quantum theory
is justiﬁed by invoking the uncertainty principle, which seems to suggest that experimental outcomes will always
be random and ambiguous. However, this may not be what the uncertainty principle really means. Recently, new
insights into measurement uncertainties have emerged, initiated by Ozawa’s analysis of the relation between errors and
disturbance in quantum measurements [1–9]. In the context of these new results it is interesting to note that there is
no clear consensus about the physics involved in quantum measurements [10–13]. It seems that too much of the focus
has been on quantitative evaluations of the uncertainties, and too little attention has been paid to the astonishing fact
that quantum mechanics does not provide a clear explanation of the measurement process itself. Recently, we have
applied the procedure used in the ﬁrst experimental evaluation of Ozawa’s uncertainties to investigate the quantum
properties of a two level system in more detail [14]. As we tried to understand the experimental procedure better, we
found that it is necessary to re-examine the relation between the experimental evidence and the physical properties of
the system. Speciﬁcally, the explanation of the Hilbert space formalism seems to be incomplete: a physical property is
not deﬁned by the outcomes of precise measurements represented by eigenstates and eigenvalues, but by quantitative
eﬀects in which diﬀerent physical properties act together to produce the outcome of a speciﬁc experiment.

In this paper, we explain how the standard formalism of quantum theory describes the relation between physical
quantities and measurement outcomes. We point out that it is not possible to identify physical properties with
their eigenstates and derive the correct relations between the diﬀerent measurement contexts by showing that the
mathematical relations between the operators provide the appropriate description of the physics of the quantum
system. Most importantly, we ﬁnd that the quantum formalism provides a precise description of the relations between
diﬀerent measurements that leaves little room for interpretation. The quantitative relations described by the operator
algebra deﬁne error free assignments of quantities to speciﬁc combinations of initial condition and measurement
outcomes, even when neither the initial state nor the measurement is given by an eigenstate of the physical quantity
in question. In this sense, the structure of quantum theory is fully deterministic, and it is this feature of the theory
that allows us to objectify measurement results obtained from diﬀerent measurement procedures.

A major concern addressed by this paper is that the one-sided focus on the statistics of quantum states may have
created a widespread misconception that quantum physics is a fuzzy and random theory that is open to various
interpretations. What we demonstrate in the following is a more rigorous link between experimental evidence and
objective physical properties that can serve as a solid empirical foundation of quantum theory. It is our hope that

∗ hofmann@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

2

this approach may bridge the gaps that have opened up between diﬀerent schools of thought in quantum physics.
Ultimately, real scientiﬁc questions need to be decided by the experiment, and not by the arbitrary opinions of
individual researchers, no matter how qualiﬁed they may seem to be. We therefore believe that the following theory
is urgently needed in order to explain the objective relations between the outcomes of diﬀerent experiments, as the
starting point of a more thorough and comprehensive experimental exploration of quantum physics.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we review the theoretical description of measurements and
discuss the relation between measurement operators and the operators representing quantitative physical properties.
The concept of a quantitative measurement error is introduced as a quantitative expression of this relation. In Sec.
III the error is evaluated and its relation with individual measurement outcomes is considered. It is shown that the
quantitative error can be used to assign joint statistical weights to the outcomes of two diﬀerent measurements. In
Sec. IV it is shown that error free estimates are possible whenever the target observable ˆA can be expressed as a sum
of an initial property ˆB and a property ˆM determined by the measurement outcomes. In Sec. V we show that the
joint statistical weights introduced in Sec. III explain how physical quantities depend on the speciﬁc measurement
context and derive the corresponding relations between the eigenvalues of non-commuting operators.
In Sec. VI
the relation between error free measurements and operator statistics is explained and non-classical correlations are
identiﬁed as context independent features of quantum statistics. Finally, Sec. VII summarizes the insights gained
from the quantitative analysis of measurements.

II. QUANTUM MEASUREMENTS

The problem of formulating a quantum theory of measurement starts with the fact that Hilbert space does not
describe the system in terms of its physical properties, but provides only an indirect description in terms of state
vectors, the components of which are loosely associated with potential outcomes of measurements that might or might
not be performed. It is therefore insuﬃcient to deﬁne a measurement as the observation of a pre-existing physical
property. Instead, the connection between the state of a system with an eventual measurement outcome is generally
expressed by a statistical operator. According to the well established rules of quantum theory, this operator ˆEm deﬁnes
the probability P (m|ψ) of obtaining the outcome m as a product trace of the operator with the density operator of
the system. In the case of a pure state | ψi,

P (m|ψ) = Tr(cid:16) ˆEm ˆρ(cid:17) = hψ | ˆEm | ψi.

(1)

Thus, the statistical operator describes the causality relation between the input state | ψi and a qualitative outcome
m observed as an eﬀect of the system on the technical devices used in the measurement. Importantly, the notion
of a physical property does not enter into this description at all, despite the fact that the measurement operator is
a summary of dynamics that are described in terms of quantitative physical properties of the system. To recover
the original connection between physical properties and measurement, it is necessary to introduce the notion of
quantitative physical properties in the form of self-adjoint operators ˆA. In most introductions to quantum mechanics,
these operators are used to establish a somewhat unclear analogy with classical physics by suggesting that they could
somehow replace the classical notion of numbers. A more speciﬁc explanation of the role of operators would be
that they describe a combination of quantity and quality by mathematically combining eigenstates | ai associated
with precise measurement results with eigenvalues that represent the quantitative outcomes Aa observed in such
measurements. The self-adjoint operator itself can then be expressed by its spectral decomposition as

Aa | aiha | .

ˆA =Xa

(2)

Quite possibly, some confusion is created by the fact that many textbook introductions seem to make the implicit
assumptions that energy is so fundamental to physics that neither the Hamilton operator nor any of the operators
that appear in its quantitative deﬁnitions need any further explanation. In the light of the recent controversies on
quantum measurement, it may be good to ask whether this implicit assumption is really justiﬁed. In general, the
operator ˆA may appear as part of a Hamiltonian, or it may be a generator of the system dynamics in its own right.
However, it is not clear whether we can observe this role of the operator experimentally, and it is not clear whether
this role is similar to the role of a corresponding classical quantity in the dynamics of a system [15, 16].
It may
therefore be helpful to focus ﬁrst on the physical meaning of the operator in the context of a quantum measurement
with a well-deﬁned observable outcome.

As mentioned above, the formulation of the operator itself combines a potential measurement outcome | ai with a
value Aa that describes the magnitude of an eﬀect caused by the physical property ˆA. However, the value Aa does

3

not enter into the theoretical description of such an ideal measurement of ˆA. It is suﬃcient to identify the individual
outcomes a, which are obtained with a probability given by

P (a|ψ) = hψ | ˆEa | ψi = |ha|ψi|2.

(3)

In this measurement, the quantity ˆA is determined by assigning a measurement value of Aa to each of the outcomes
a. The only physical motivation for the speciﬁc assignment of values a is obtained from the interpretation of the
dynamics that relate the system property ˆA to the measurement outcomes a, and this interpretation is in turn based
on the analysis of the interaction between the system and the meter in the Hilbert space formalism.

In a more realistic description of measurements, it is rarely possible to identify each outcome with a precise value
of ˆA. If the outcome m is partially decided by the quantity ˆA, we can still associate an estimate ˜Am of the quantity ˆA
with each outcome. Since this is a quantitative estimate, its precision cannot be given in qualitative terms. Speciﬁcally,
it makes no sense to ask for a probability that the estimate is correct. Instead, the magnitude of the error must be
quantiﬁed in terms of the diﬀerence between the estimate ˜Am and the target observable ˆA. In the operator formalism,
this quantitative deﬁnition of an error is expressed by

ˆǫm(A) = ˜Am − ˆA.

(4)

Since this error is an operator, its evaluation requires an application of the Hilbert space algebra. In cases where the
measurement operator ˆEm does not commute with the operator ˆǫm(A) describing its error, this evaluation contains
non-classical correlations between the measurement outcome m and the observable ˆA [14]. The quantitative relation
between the outcome m and the physical property ˆA is therefore a non-trivial scientiﬁc problem that cannot be reduced
to the classical notions of information or statistics. In the following, we will address this problem by analyzing the
Hilbert space expression of quantitative errors given by Eq.(4) with respect to the quantitative relation they establish
between the general measurement outcomes m and the precise measurement outcomes a associated with the eigenvalues
Aa of the physical property described by the operator ˆA.

III. ERROR STATISTICS IN HILBERT SPACE

Although there are many ways of evaluating statistical errors, a widely used measure is the variance, which is
deﬁned as the average square of the error values. In the context of quantum measurements, this error measure was
ﬁrst applied to a general Hilbert space description of measurement interactions by Ozawa [1], who found that the
operator ordering obtained from the detailed description of the measurement dynamics results in an error of

ε2(A) =Xm

hψ | ( ˜Am − ˆA) ˆEm( ˜Am − ˆA) | ψi.

(5)

This formulation of a measurement error has recently attracted a lot of attention since it provides a description
of errors that seems to defy the uncertainty principle [4–9]. However, it is important to recognize that this result
relies on the inclusion of information from the initial state | ψi, which is a separate condition that is not part of the
theoretical description of the measurement process given by ˆEm [12, 17]. To understand the physics described by
this quantiﬁcation of the error, it is therefore important to consider how quantum mechanics expresses the relation
between the physical property ˆA and the observable causality that connects the initial conditions ψ with the ﬁnal
outcomes m.

What makes it diﬃcult to understand the physics described by the mathematical form of Eq.(5) is that it relates
a qualitative outcome to an operator, thereby creating an artiﬁcial asymmetry in the description of the physical
process. To restore the symmetry in terms of measurement outcomes, we can make use of the fact that the operator
ˆA is associated with a set of projective measurements ˆEa =| aiha | for which the eigenvalues Aa represent an error free
set of measurement outcomes. The error ε2(A) therefore evaluates a quantitative diﬀerence between the assignment
of ˜Am to m and the assignment of Aa to a. Importantly, Hilbert space describes a well deﬁned correlation between
these two assignments, even though the formalism also indicates that it is impossible to combine the outcomes m and
a into a joint measurement corresponding to the logical combination of “m AND a”. Quantum theory thus provides
a unique deﬁnition of non-classical correlations between the two quantitative evaluations, even though the outcomes
m and a never share a joint reality.

Mathematically, it is possible to trace back the non-classical correlations to joint statistical weights, since the
contribution from the hypothetical outcome a is exclusively associated with the value Aa, in the same way that the
outcome m is exclusively associated with its estimate ˜Am. Even though there exists no joint measurement of a and
m, it is therefore possible to deﬁne a joint statistical weight P (a, m|ψ) for any combination of a and m by evaluating

4

how the changes in the error ε2(A) caused by variations of Aa and ˜Am are correlated. Speciﬁcally, the joint statistical
weight of a and m is obtained by

P (a, m|ψ) = −

1
2

∂ 2

∂Aa∂ ˜Am

ε2(A)

(6)

We can thus derive a uniquely deﬁned joint statistical weight of the measurement outcomes a and m from the error
measure ε2(A) deﬁned by the operators ˆA and ˆEm. Importantly, this joint statistical weight is diﬀerent from a joint
probability because it does not require a joint reality of a and m. Instead, it is based entirely on the quantitative
relation between the estimates of ˆA obtained under the two diﬀerent circumstances described by the two separate
sets of outcomes {a} and {m}. Since this quantitative relation is described by the Hilbert space formalism, the joint
statistical weight can also be described in terms of states and operators. Using the Hilbert space expression of the
measurement errors in Eq.(5), the joint statistical weight describes a relation between the measurement operators ˆEm
and | aiha | in the state | ψi,

P (a, m|ψ) = Re(cid:16)hψ | ˆEm | aiha | ψi(cid:17) .

(7)

Thus the quantitative evaluation of errors corresponds to joint statistical weights for measurement outcomes of mea-
surements that cannot be performed jointly and therefore have no joint reality. This observation is particularly
signiﬁcant, because the mathematical form in Eq.(7) results in the assignment of non-positive joint statistical weights
in several important cases that we will discuss in more detail in the following.

At this point, it may be worth noting that the relation between non-positive joint statistical weights and the
measurement uncertainties introduced by Ozawa has been discussed previously in the context of quasi-probability
representations of quantum statistics. Speciﬁcally, the joint statistical weights in Eq.(7) are the real parts of the Dirac
distribution of the state | ψi, a quasi-probability representation that is closely associated with the algebra of weak
values [2, 3, 18–21]. It has also been shown that the measurement error can be observed experimentally by performing
a weak measurement of ˆEa =| aiha | on the input state [3, 5], and the present discussion was originally motivated
by an attempt to understand the physics of these experimental results better [14]. Here, we would like to address
the problem that such measurement results cannot be interpreted as a relative frequency of joint outcomes, since the
individual weak measurements represent only a statistical preference for the outcome a and not an exclusive selection
of a [12].
It is therefore necessary to consider the role of the outcomes a in the experiments more carefully. As
discussed above, the joint statistical weights actually describe quantitative relations between non-commuting physical
properties in the absence of any joint reality. Based on a more thorough analysis of the mathematical relations,
we have shown that the joint statistical weight is deﬁned by the way that the quantum formalism attaches physical
quantities to the outcomes of individual measurements. This means that the notion of a joint statistical weight does
not require any joint realities of a and m, which explains why its values can be negative. The present approach thus
allows us to identify the relations between physical properties that are responsible for the appearance of negative joint
statistical weights, which can help us understand the paradoxical nature of non-classical correlations [22–30].

Before we proceed to analyze the quantitative relations that cause the appearance of negative joint statistical
weights, it may be useful to reﬂect a bit on the more familiar aspects of joint statistical weights and the reason why
they are often confused with conventional joint probabilities, despite the fact that they can take negative values. In
fact, we should not forget that the concept of “uncertainty” did not originate from quantum mechanics, but from
practical considerations about the role of quantities in physics. The notion of a perfectly precise measurement only
makes sense in the context of discrete values, which only emerge as a result of quantization. In classical physics,
all physical properties are necessarily given by continuous and real valued quantities, so perfect precision would
require the measurement of a never ending series of digits. Classical physics is therefore based on the idea that
physical quantities can be used to describe physical situations even when the precision with which we can know these
quantities is limited. This means that the physical properties only appear in the measurement outcomes m because
we can identify a quantitastive causality relation that connects the physical property ˆA of an object with the outcome
m, even though this relation cannot be described by a simple identity between the outcome m and a hypothetical
precise outcome a. In classical physics, this problem can be solved by the joint statistical weights deﬁned in Eq.(6),
where the joint statistical weight corresponds to a hypothetical joint probability of the outcome m and the correct
result a. However, quantum theory suggests that the assumption of such a joint probability is is a misinterpretation
of the physics, even in the case where the joint statistical weights are positive.

A close analogy to the classical statistical argument is obtained when the measurement operator ˆEm commutes
with ˆA, so that the eigenstates | ai are also eigenstates of ˆEm. In this case, it is tempting to argue that ˆEm describes
a conventional conditional probability P (m|a), given by the eigenvalue relation

ˆEm | ai = P (m|a) | ai.

(8)

As a result, the joint statistical weight of Eq.(7) can be written as

P (a, m|ψ) = P (m|a)P (a|ψ),

5

(9)

which corresponds to the probability of measuring ﬁrst a and then m in a sequence of two measurements. However,
we should remember that this formula is used to relate m to a in the absence of a measurement of a. The actual role
of the joint statistical weight P (a, m|ψ) is to provide a universally valid description of the causality relation between
m and a which identiﬁes the inﬂuence of the physical quantity ˆA on the outcome m. Thus, we should be careful
to note that the hypothesis of a joint reality (a, m) is not even needed when the observables commute, so that the
positivity of the joint statistical weight P (a, m|ψ) should not be misunderstood as an argument in favor of realist
models.

Interestingly, there exists one case where it is possible to identify a joint reality of a and m, and this case does not
even require commutativity of ˆEm and ˆA. If the initial state is an eigenstate of ˆA, the causality relation between a
and m is given by the experimentally observed conditional probability

P (m|a) = ha | ˆEm | ai.

(10)

This expression shows that the outcome m is sensitive to a, and therefore to the quantity ˆA associated with a.
However, it is not possible to apply P (m|a) to any other input state | ψi, since Eq.(9) only applies when ˆEm and ˆA
commute. In the case of non-commuting operators, the consistency of quantum theory requires that the only statistical
representation of the causality by which ˆA causes the outcome m is given by Eq.(7), where the unavoidable negative
joint statistical weights represent the quantum modiﬁcations of causality by non-classical correlations between the
physical properties.

The conclusion from the above discussion is that it is insuﬃcient to associate physical quantities ˆA exclusively
with the outcomes of precise measurements of the eigenvalue outcomes a. The role of physical properties ˆA is not
limited to the individual measurement outcomes a, since non-commuting physical properties are related to each other
quantitatively by the operator algebra of Hilbert space. In the following, we will use the deﬁnition of quantitative
errors in Eq.(5) to identify precise quantitative relations between non-commuting physical properties.

IV. ERROR FREE MEASUREMENT

Eq.(5) deﬁnes the quantitative error of the estimate ˜Am for a measurement outcome of m for any set of measurement
operators { ˆEm}. If this error is zero, we can conclude that the quantity ˆA is precisely determined by the combination
of initial conditions | ψi and ﬁnal outcomes ˆEm. Error free measurements thus provide us with fully deterministic
relations between the physical properties represented by these conditions, resulting in a quantitative description of
measurement causality that explains the physics without any statistical concepts.

To identify the conditions under which a measurement has zero error, we make use of the fact that Eq.(5) describes
the error as a sum of positive contributions from each measurement outcome m. Because of this, the total error can
only be zero if the contribution for every m is itself zero. We therefore ﬁnd that the necessary and suﬃcient condition
for an error of ε2(A) = 0 is that every estimate ˜Am must satisfy the relation

hψ | ( ˜Am − ˆA) ˆEm( ˜Am − ˆA) | ψi = 0.

(11)

Since each operator ˆEm can be replaced by its spectral decomposition, a value of zero is only obtained when ˆEm can
be expressed by a single pure state projector, or when ˆEm is an arbitrary combination of pure state projectors that
achieve an error of zero for the same value of ˜Am. We can therefore conclude that error free measurements can always
be represented by measurement operators of the form ˆEm = λ | mihm |. Using these measurement operators, the
condition for error free measurements can be simpliﬁed to

˜Am =

hm | ˆA | ψi

hm | ψi

.

(12)

The necessary and suﬃcient condition for an error free measurement according to Eq.(5) is that the estimates ˜Am are
all equal to an expression of the Hilbert space algebra that is usually identiﬁed as the weak value of ˆA for the state | ψi
post-selected on | mi [31, 32]. Importantly, this result is independent of the actual performance of weak measurements
and demonstrates that weak values are part of the standard operator formalism. In an error free measurement, the
physical meaning of ˜Am is that of a precise quantitative evaluation of ˆA associated with every measurement outcome

6

m. Note that no post-selection is considered. Instead, the spectrum of values of ˜Am assigned to the diﬀerent outcomes
m replaces the eigenvalue spectrum of ˆA as an equally valid representation of the statistics of ˆA in the state | ψi.

In principle, Eq.(12) indicates that any projective measurement {| mi} can have a measurement error of ε2(A) = 0
if the corresponding set of weak values of m are chosen for the estimates ˜Am. However, weak values are generally
complex, and the imaginary part is usually obtained in a dynamical response of the system that is not directly
connected to the quantity represented by ˆA [33, 34]. Since ˜Am is an estimate of the quantity ˆA, it does not have an
imaginary part and Eq.(12) can only be satisﬁed if the weak value is real from the start. Eﬀectively, the condition for
an error free measurement is that ˆA, {| mi} and | ψi must satisfy the relations

Im  hm | ˆA | ψi

hm | ψi ! = 0

(13)

for all outcomes m. It should be noted that this still leaves a wide variety of cases where neither | ψi nor any of
the | mi are eigenstates of ˆA. In particular, Eq.(13) will be satisﬁed whenever both | ψi and | mi can be expressed
by superpositions of eigenstates | ai with real number coeﬃcients. It is thus possible to ﬁnd examples of error free
measurements by constructing a basis {| mi} from real valued superpositions of {| ai} and choosing a non-orthogonal
real valued superposition as input state.

The possibility of error free measurements ˆEm that do not commute with the target observable ˆA indicates that
there is a precise quantitative relation between m, ˆA, and ψ which is expressed by the error free measurement result
˜Am. In the Hilbert space formalism, this quantitative relation can be described as a relation between three operators,
where one operator is associated with the measurement outcomes m and another operator is associated with the initial
state | ψi. Speciﬁcally, the physical quantity ˆA can be expressed as a sum of a physical quantity ˆB that has a value
of Bψ for the initial state | ψi and a physical quantity ˆM that has a value of Mm for the measurement outcome m.
The quantitative relation between ˆA and the measurement outcomes is then given by the operator sum

ˆA = ˆB + ˆM .

(14)

This equation represents the additivity of physical properties in the Hilbert space formalism. In the present context,
it is important that each of the three operators has a completely diﬀerent set of eigenstates. The initial state | ψi
is an eigenstate of the operator ˆB, which means that the physical property ˆB of the system was determined as a
result of the initial quantum state preparation. The operator ˆM represents a quantity determined exclusively by the
measurement outcomes, so its eigenstates are given by the measurement basis {| mi}, which are diﬀerent from the
eigenstates {| ai} of ˆA. Since ˆM describes the dependence of ˜Am on m, it is given by

ˆM =Xm (cid:16) ˜Am − Bψ(cid:17) | mihm | .

(15)

Importantly, the measurement outcome m is completely explained by the physical property ˆM of the system. The
fact that {| mi} is a complete orthogonal basis of the Hilbert space of the system means that the properties of the
meter system have no eﬀect on the measurement outcome. The measurement outcome is an objective consequence of
the value Mm of the physical property ˆM .

The relation between the two non-commuting physical quantities ˆM and ˆA can only be established through the
third physical quantity ˆB associated with the initial state | ψi. This physical property has a ﬁxed value of Bψ for its
eigenstate | ψi, and this value contributes equally to each estimate ˜Am. It is therefore not possible to identify a unique
value of Bψ. The reason for this ambiguity is that ˆM and ˆB are only distinguished by their diﬀerent eigenstates, not
by their absolute values. Adding or subtracting a constant value does not change the eigenstates of the operators,
so it is not possible to decide from mathematics alone how the average contribution to ˆA should be split between ˆM
and ˆB. However, it is interesting to note that Eq.(14) automatically determines the complete set of eigenstates of ˆB,
since the operator ˆB is determined by the diﬀerence of ˆA and ˆM . By using this deﬁnition of the operator ˆB, we can
conﬁrm that Bψ is the eigenvalue of ˆB for the initial state | ψi,

ˆB | ψi = ( ˆA − ˆM ) | ψi

| mihm | ( ˆA − ˜Am + Bψ) | ψi

=Xm

= Bψ | ψi.

(16)

Note that operator expression ˆA − ˜Am in the second line can be identiﬁed with the error operator ˆǫm(A) in Eq.(4).
Thus, the disappearance of the error ensures that | ψi is an eigenstate of the diﬀerence between ˆA and ˆM .

7

We can now explain why a quantitative measurement error of zero does not require a joint reality of eigenstates, and
why it is usually obtained for measured values ˜Am that are diﬀerent from the eigenvalues Aa of the target observable
ˆA. The quantitative relation that makes this error free estimate possible is the additivity of physical properties, as
expressed by the operator sum in Eq.(14). The quantitative relation between physical properties expressed by such
operator sums cannot be explained in terms of the eigenvalues of the operators, because the sum of the eigenvalues is
diﬀerent from the eigenvalues of the sum. It is this non-classical quantitative relation between physical properties that
is expressed by the error free weak value estimates of Eq.(12). In particular, the initial state | ψi always corresponds
to a known physical property ˆB that evaluates the quantitative diﬀerence ( ˆA − ˆM ) between the target observable ˆA
and the measured quantity ˆM .

The explanation of error free measurements by precise quantitative relations between physical properties shows
that it is not suﬃcient to identify physical properties with the particular set of idealized measurement outcomes
represented by their eigenstates. In many circumstances, a more meaningful deﬁnition of a physical property will
involve a combination of initial and ﬁnal conditions, and in these cases, the eigenstate decomposition of the operator
will have no physical meaning. A particularly striking example of this problem is given by the description of time
evolution in quantum mechanics, where it is reasonable to be interested in the rate of change for a speciﬁc observable.
Such a rate of change is usually observed by a sequence of measurements, where the ﬁrst measurement prepares the
initial value and the ﬁnal measurement determines the ﬁnal value. This corresponds exactly to the situation discussed
above, where ˆM is simply ˆB(t) and the rate of change is given by ˆA/t = ( ˆB(t) − ˆB(0))/t. Importantly, the time
derivative of an operator does not commute with that operator. This means that the classical concept of trajectories
must be replaced with quantitative operator relations that describe the observable eﬀects of the time evolution. For
the motion of a particle, it is only possible to assign an error free position between initial preparation and ﬁnal
measurement if the weak value of position associated with the initial and ﬁnal conditions is a real value, and even
then it is not correct to identify the value of the position operator with the detection of a particle at that position,
since the quantitative estimate of position is diﬀerent from an estimate of the probability of ﬁnding a particle at that
position. However, it should be kept in mind that positions are usually observed in the quantitative dependence of
interaction strength on distance, so the quantitative evaluation of position is closer to the observable physics than the
qualitative assignment of position associated with particle detections.

Quantitative relations are at the heart of the deﬁnitions of physical concepts. It is therefore not possible to reduce
the physics of a system to the measurement outcomes observed in limited sets of speciﬁc measurements. Instead, it
is necessary to explain how physical quantities appear in diﬀerent contexts, each of which is represented by a speciﬁc
combination of initial and ﬁnal conditions. Problems arise because the quantities observed in each context are diﬀerent
from each other. For this reason, it is extremely important to examine the relation between diﬀerent measurement
outcomes described by the joint statistical weights given by Eq. (7) in more detail.

V. RELATIONS BETWEEN PHYSICAL PROPERTIES

As shown in sec. III, it is possible to express the error statistics of the measurement ˆEm in terms of the joint

statistical weights of a and m deﬁned by Eq.(6). The measurement error ε2(A) itself is then given by

ε2(A) =Xm,a

( ˜Am − Aa)2 P (a, m|ψ),

(17)

an expression that corresponds to classical error statistics, where P (a, m|ψ) would be the probability of a joint outcome
of a and m. However, quantum mechanics does not permit an interpretation of Eq.(17) in terms of joint realities of
a and m, as indicated by the possibility of negative joint statistical weights.

As shown in the previous section, the error ε2(A) can be zero in situations where the measured values ˜Am are
generally diﬀerent from the eigenvalues Aa. Since this means that the squared diﬀerences between the two values
are all positive and non-zero, the sum in Eq.(17) can only be zero if some of the joint statistical weights P (a, m|ψ)
are negative. We can therefore conclude from the discussions above that negative joint statistical weights are a
necessary characteristic of error free measurements. Since the error free measurement can also be explained in terms
of the quantitative relations between the physical quantities represented by Hilbert space operators, these non-positive
statistical weights are simply a more speciﬁc formulation of the physics represented by the established formalism. In
particular, non-positive joint statistical weights describe the necessary relations between the measurement outcomes
m and the measurement outcomes a that are required in order to reconcile the quantitative relations between the
operators ˆA, ˆM and ˆB with the eigenvalues of the respective operators. We can therefore combine the results for
the joint statistical weights with the results of the previous section to arrive at a better understanding of how joint
statistical weights describe the relations between quantities and measurement outcomes in diﬀerent measurement
contexts.

8

To make the connection between error free measurements and joint statistical weights, we ﬁrst derive the optimal
estimate ˜Am for a given joint statistical weight P (a, m|ψ) by minimizing the error as given by Eq.(17). As expected
from the formal analogy with classical error statistics, the minimal error is obtained when the estimates ˜Am correspond
to conditional averages of the joint statistical weights,

Aa

P (a, m|ψ)
P (m|ψ)

.

˜Am =Xa

(18)

Now, we need to identify the condition under which this optimized estimate is error free. For this purpose, we
can reformulate (12) by using the spectral decomposition of the operator ˆA to arrive at a condition for error free
measurements that relates two sums over a,

Aa

P (a, m|ψ)
P (m|ψ)

Xa

Aa

=Xa

hψ | mihm | aiha | ψi

hψ | mihm | ψi

.

(19)

This condition is both necessary and suﬃcient for error free measurements. However, it may be worth noting that a
suﬃcient condition can be obtained by demanding equality for every element of the sum. In this case, the conditions
for error free measurements do not depend on the eigenvalues Aa, so it applies equally to measurements of any
non-linear function of ˆA. This condition is given by

Comparison with Eq.(7) shows that this equality is satisﬁed whenever the right hand side is a real number,

P (a, m|ψ) = hψ | mihm | aiha | ψi.

Im (hψ | mihm | aiha | ψi) = 0.

(20)

(21)

Whenever Eq.(21) is satisﬁed for all combinations of a and m, the measurement is error free and Eq.(18) expresses
the relation between the values of ˆA obtained in the measurement m and the values of ˆA obtained in a measurement
of a. In general, this condition restricts the possible choices of | ψi for which joint error free measurements of ˆA and
ˆM are possible. However, a large number of non-trivial solutions can be obtained by ﬁnding pairs of basis systems
where all inner products hm | ai are real numbers. In that case, | ψi can be any superposition of | ai or | mi with
real valued coeﬃcients, as suggested below Eq.(13). It may also be interesting to note that the right hand side of
Eq.(20) is the Dirac distribution of the state | ψi. We thus ﬁnd that a measurement is error free whenever the Dirac
distribution of the measurement outcomes m and the outcomes of a projective measurement a takes only real values.
We have now conﬁrmed that Eq.(18) describes the relation between an error free estimate ˜Am and the eigenvalues
Aa in terms of the corresponding joint statistical weights P (a, m|ψ). We also know from the discussion in Sec. IV
that ˜Am is error free because it can be obtained from the operator relation ˆA = ˆM + ˆB as a sum of eigenvalues of ˆM
and ˆB,

˜Am = Mm + Bψ.

(22)

We can now address the problem that the quantitative relation between the operators ˆA and ˆM , ˆB does not correspond
to any quantitative relation between the eigenvalues Aa and Mm, Bψ. According to Eq.(18) and Eq.(22), the relation
between the eigenvalues of the operators is given by

(Aa − Bψ)

P (a, m|ψ)
P (m|ψ)

.

Mm =Xa

(23)

Here, the joint statistical weights P (a, m|ψ) describe a transformation procedure by which the diﬀerences of the
eigenvalues of ˆA and ˆB are converted into an eigenvalue of ˆM . This transformation highlights the fact that the
measurement of m and the measurement of a are incompatible contexts, whereas the operator relations are context
independent descriptions of the physical object. Therefore the quantitative relation between eigenvalues observed in
the diﬀerent contexts need to be described by transormations between these diﬀerent measurement contexts.

It is important to realize that we can only identify a physical object if its properties are independent of the context
- otherwise, we would not be able to tell whether we are really observing the same system in diﬀerent experimental
situations. It seems that most arguments about incompatibilities of measurement contexts in quantum mechanics
overlook this important requirement. Contextuality is only acceptable if we know precisely how the relation between
the contexts can be explained in terms of objective physical properties. The discussion above shows that the Hilbert

space formalism oﬀers a solution to this problem once we realize that the operators provide a context independent
deﬁnition of quantities that includes a precise prescription for the transformation between diﬀerent contexts.

It should also be noted that the introduction of ˆM establishes a completely symmetric relation between a measure-
ment of m and a measurement of a. This means that a measurement of a is not only error free in ˆA, but also error
free in ˆM , with the error free estimate of ˆM given by

9

Mm

P (a, m|ψ)

P (a|ψ)

.

(24)

˜Ma =Xm

Aa =Xm

From this relation, we can derive the reverse transformation that converts the eigenvalues Mm of ˆM back into
eigenvalues Aa of ˆA,

(Mm + Bψ)

P (a, m|ψ)

P (a|ψ)

.

(25)

Here, the eigenvalues represent the quantitative outcomes obtained in the speciﬁc context of a fully resolved mea-
surement of the corresponding quantity. To explain the quantitative relation between the values Aa obtained in the
context of outcomes a and the values Mm obtained in the context of outcomes m, non-positive joint statistical weights
can be used to convert the two sets of values into each other.

Although there is a formal analogy between this transformation and the calculation of conditional averages, it
is important to remember that ψ represents the physical property ˆB in the operator relation given by Eq.(14).
Therefore the joint statistical weight is a relation between physical properties that does not involve any speciﬁc
physical situation. Likewise, the quantities related to each other by the joint statistical weights are eigenvalues
and not conditional averages. It needs to be emphasized that the non-positive statistical weights are an expression
of deterministic relations between the physical properties, equivalent in meaning to the original operator relation in
Eq.(14), but more speciﬁc in their identiﬁcation of the measurement contexts associated with the respective eigenvalues
of the operators.

The transformations discussed in this section show that the deterministic relations between the physical quantities
ˆA, ˆM and ˆB can only be expressed in terms of their eigenvalues if the faulty notion of a joint reality is replaced
by the more appropriate transformation between the measurement contexts described by the joint statistical weights
derived in sec. III. Our analysis therefore clariﬁes the role of the measurement context in quantum measurements.
Importantly, the measurement context can be deﬁned by objective physical properties without any direct reference
to the state of the environment or the measurement setup. The absence of a joint reality for the diﬀerent contexts
can then be explained completely in terms of the non-classical relations between the physical quantities of quantum
systems.

VI. THE ORIGIN OF NON-CLASSICAL CORRELATIONS

Perhaps the most confusing aspect of quantum mechanics is the rather peculiar combination of statistical concepts
and deterministic quantitative relation in the mathematical formalism. As we have shown in the previous section,
this results in the deﬁnition of joint statistical weights that appear to be similar to probability distributions but
describe reversible transformations between two diﬀerent measurement contexts. A direct statistical interpretation is
impossible, since some of the joint statistical weights are necessarily negative. However, the error free assignment of
measurement values ( ˜Am, Mm) to an outcome m, and of (Aa, ˜Ma) to an outcome a indicates that statistical correlation
between the quantities ˆA and ˆM in the initial state | ψi can be determined from either one of the two measurements.
Speciﬁcally, we can express the correlations by the statistical average over the product of the two error free values.
The reason why this average product is independent of the measurement context is that the two averages are related
by the transformation between contexts expressed by the joint statistical weight P (a, m|ψ). It is therefore possible
to express the average product using only the eigenvalues and the joint statistical weights. This context independent
representation of non-classical correlations corresponds directly with the Hilbert space expression of the expectation
value of the operator product,

C(AM |ψ) =Xm
=Xa
=Xa,m

˜AmMmP (m|ψ)

Aa ˜MaP (a|ψ)

AaMmP (a, m|ψ)

= hψ | ˆM ˆA | ψi.

10

(26)

We thus ﬁnd that the correlation deﬁned by the operator product of ˆA and ˆM can be evaluated as product of the
eigenvalues using the joint statistical weight, or as the statistical average of the product of error free estimates within
In eﬀect, the operator product of the two non-commuting operators ˆA and
any error free measurement context.
ˆM correctly describes the non-classical correlations observed in any measurement context that permits error free
estimates of both ˆA and ˆM . Here too, the joint statistical weight provides the correct description of the relation
between the two contexts deﬁned by the eigenstates.

The probability distributions P (m|ψ) and P (a|ψ) describe the randomness of the initial condition ψ, which only
determines the value of ˆB, but not the values of ˆA or ˆM . The quantitative relation between the three properties
means that the product average can be expressed in terms of the statistics of ˆA or of ˆM by using the fact that ψ
determines the value of ˆB,

C(AM |ψ) = hψ | ˆA2 | ψi − Bψhψ | ˆA | ψi

= hψ | ˆM 2 | ψi + Bψhψ | ˆM | ψi.

(27)

Thus, the non-classical correlations between ˆA and ˆM are fully determined by the ﬂuctuations of measurement
outcomes, whether the measurement is a measurement of a or a measurement of m.

For a speciﬁc measurement context, the correlations and the ﬂuctuations are related by the appropriate quanti-
tative relations between the error free estimate and the eigenvalues. For example, the statistics of correlations and
ﬂuctuations for the measurement outcomes m is given by

C(AM |ψ) =Xm
=Xm
=Xm

˜AmMmP (m|ψ)

(Mm + Bψ)MmP (m|ψ)

˜Am( ˜Am − Bψ)P (m|ψ).

(28)

Thus non-classical correlations can be traced back to the deterministic relations between the physical quantities ˆA and
ˆM obtained for a ﬁxed value of the quantity ˆB. The error free values ˜Am indicate that the ﬂuctuations in ˆA and the
ﬂuctuations in ˆM originate from the same source of randomness. The Hilbert space formalism describes this source
of randomness in terms of the state vector | ψi, but the physical meaning is better explained by the transformation
relations between the measurement contexts a and m.

In summary, the non-classical correlations expressed by products of non-commuting operators can be explained in
terms of the transformations between measurement contexts given by the joint statistical weights. These correlations
are directly observed in error free measurements, where the known relations between target observable and the mea-
surement result provide a precise value of the target observable that is diﬀerent from an eigenvalue. Nevertheless, the
same non-classical correlations can be observed in all measurement contexts, demonstrating that it is the quantitative
relations between physical properties and not the individual outcomes that are objectively real.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

Our quantitative analysis of measurement errors shows that the mathematical description of physical quantities by
Hilbert space operators is justiﬁed by the causality relations between the physical properties that characterize the
initial state and the physical properties associated with the outcomes of the ﬁnal measurement. The additivity of
physical quantities expressed by Eq.(14) has important consequences for the relations between diﬀerent measurement
contexts, since it provides a precise description of the transformations of physical quantities between the two contexts.
Signiﬁcantly, the relations between quantities and hence the relations between contexts are fully deterministic and
represent the universal relations between physical properties that deﬁne a physical object. It is therefore possible to
reconcile the diﬀerent measurement concept with the identiﬁcation of objective properties as the fundamental causes
of measurement outcomes.

The results presented here suggest that a purely information theoretic or statistical approach to quantum physics
may be insuﬃcient. The quantitative relations between physical properties cannot be described in terms of conven-
tional probability distributions, because the relations between the values observed in diﬀerent measurement contexts
make it necessary to assign non-positive joint statistical weights. Oppositely, it is possible to derive a more detailed

11

description of non-classical correlations from the relations between the physical quantities. Quantitative relations be-
tween physical properties are therefore more fundamental to quantum physics than the statistical properties associated
with quantum states.

Most importantly, this investigation into the relation between measurement outcomes and physical properties shows
that all diﬀerent measurement contexts relate to the same set of physical properties, so that the complete Hilbert
space structure can be explained in terms of experimentally accessible physics. This kind of analysis should be applied
to all quantum experiments, since it may well be the only way to establish a proper empirical foundation of quantum
physics. At present, it is a weakness of quantum research that experimental results are only used to verify one speciﬁc
aspect of the theory, which means that we deprive ourselves of more general insights into the actual physics. Here,
we have shown that the quantitative relations between physical properties represent the actual physics of a quantum
system, making it possible to relate diﬀerent measurement contexts to each other. We believe that this result will be
absolutely essential for future progress towards a more complete understanding of quantum physics.

[1] M. Ozawa, Phys. Rev. A 67, 042105 (2003).
[2] M. J. W. Hall, Phys. Rev. A 69, 052113 (2004).
[3] A. P. Lund and H. M. Wiseman, New J. Phys. 12, 093011 (2010).
[4] J. Erhart, S. Sponar, G. Sulyok, G. Badurek, M. Ozawa, and Y. Hasegawa, Nat. Phys. 8, 185 (2012).
[5] L. A. Rozema, A. Darabi, D. H. Mahler, A. Hayat, Y. Soudagar, and A. M. Steinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 100404

(2012).

[6] S.-Y. Baek, F. Kaneda, M. Ozawa, and K. Edamatsu, Sci. Rep. 3, 2221 (2013).
[7] M. M. Weston, M. J. W. Hall, M. S. Palsson, H. M. Wiseman, and G. J. Pryde, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 220402 (2013).
[8] C. Branciard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 6742 (2013).
[9] M. Ringbauer, D. N. Biggerstaﬀ, M. A. Broome, A. Fedrizzi, C. Branciard, and A. G. White, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 020401

(2014).

[10] Y. Watanabe, T. Sagawa, and M. Ueda, Phys. Rev. A 84, 042121 (2011).
[11] P. Busch, P. Lahti, and R. F. Werner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 160405 (2013).
[12] J. Dressel and F. Nori, Phys. Rev. A 89, 022106 (2014).
[13] P. Busch, P. Lahti, and R. F. Werner, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 1261 (2014).
[14] M. Iinuma, Y. Suzuki, T. Nii, R. Kinoshita, and H. F. Hofmann, Phys. Rev. A 93, 032104 (2016).
[15] H. F, Hofmann, Phys. Rev. A 89, 042115 (2014).
[16] H. F. Hofmann, e-print arXiv:1508.02779
[17] H.F. Hofmann, Phys. Rev. A 67, 022106 (2003).
[18] P. A. M. Dirac, Rev. Mod. Phys. 17, 195 (1945).
[19] L. M. Johansen, Phys. Rev. A 76, 012119 (2007).
[20] J. S. Lundeen and C. Bamber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 070402 (2012).
[21] H. F. Hofmann, New J. Phys. 14, 043031 (2012).
[22] K. J. Resch, J. S. Lundeen, and A. M. Steinberg, Phys. Lett. A 324, 125 (2004).
[23] A. N. Jordan, A. N. Korotkov, and M. B¨uttiker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 026805 (2006).
[24] J. Tollaksen, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 40, 9033 (2007).
[25] J. S. Lundeen and A. M. Steinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 020404 (2009).
[26] K. Yokota, T. Yamamoto, M. Koashi, and N. Imoto, New J. Phys. 11, 033011 (2009).
[27] M. E. Goggin, M. P. Almeida, M. Barbieri, B. P. Lanyon, J. L. O’Brien, A. G. White, and G.J. Pryde, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. U. S. A. 108 1256 (2011).

[28] Y. Suzuki, M. Iinuma, and H. F. Hofmann, New J. Phys. 14, 103022 (2012).
[29] T. Denkmayr, H. Geppert, S. Sponar, H. Lemmel, A. Matzkin, J. Tollaksen, and Y. Hasegawa, Nat. Commun. 5, 4492

(2014).

[30] Holger F. Hofmann, Phys. Rev. A 91, 062123 (2015).
[31] A. Hosoya and Y. Shikano, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 43, 385307 (2010).
[32] Holger F. Hofmann, Phys. Rev. A 83, 022106 (2011).
[33] H. F. Hofmann, New J. Phys. 13, 103009 (2011).
[34] J. Dressel and A. N. Jordan, Phys. Rev. A 85, 012107 (2012).

