6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

.

 
 
]
S
P
n
i
l
n
[
 
 

1
v
8
9
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Visualization of Stress Wave Propagation via
Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

Joshua C. Rivey, Gil-Yong Lee, Jinkyu Yang
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA

Youngkey Kim
SM Instruments, Daejon, Republic of Korea

Sungchan Kim
Korea Aerospace Research Institute, Daejon, Republic of Korea

February 2016

Abstract.

We experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of visualizing stress waves propa-
gating in plates using air-coupled acoustic emission sensors. Speciﬁcally, we employ a
device that embeds arrays of microphones around an optical lens in a helical pattern.
By implementing a beamforming technique, this remote sensing system allows us to
record wave propagation events in situ via a single-shot and full-ﬁeld measurement.
This is a signiﬁcant improvement over the conventional wave propagation tracking ap-
proaches based on laser doppler vibrometry or digital image correlation techniques. In
this paper, we focus on demonstrating the feasibility and eﬃcacy of this air-coupled
acoustic emission technique using large metallic plates exposed to external impacts.
The visualization results of stress wave propagation will be shown under various im-
pact scenarios. Such wave visualization capability is of tremendous importance from a
structural health monitoring and nondestructive evaluation (SHM/NDE) standpoint.
The proposed technique can be used to characterize and localize damage by detecting
the attenuation, reﬂection, and scattering of stress waves that occurs at damage lo-
cations. This can ultimately lead to the development of new SHM/NDE methods for
identifying hidden cracks or delaminations in metallic or composite plate structures
simultaneously negating the need for mounted contact sensors.

Keywords: sound camera, beamforming, acoustic emission, impact identiﬁcation

1. Introduction

In aerospace, civil, and mechanical engineering applications, it is imperative to ensure
structural integrity through the detection and characterization of damage and defects.
The presence of defects, such as cracks, dents, corrosion, delaminations, or numerous
other forms of damage, can signiﬁcantly reduce the inherit properties and performance

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

2

of a structure, thereby increasing the chance of premature failure. Therefore, structural
health monitoring (SHM) and nondestructive evaluation (NDE) have been subjects
of intense studies in recent decades.
In particular, increases in the use of advanced
materials, sensors/actuators, and manufacturing processes has spurred the development
of numerous SHM/NDE techniques. These methods include – but are not limited to –
thermography, shearography, X-radiography, eddy current, ultrasonic C-scan, scanning
laser Doppler vibrometry, and guided wave-based ultrasound techniques [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
They are based on thermal, electromagnetic, acoustic/mechanical, and other multi-
physical feedback, and each technique oﬀers unique advantages and shortcomings.

Using acoustic emissions for purposes of detecting and localizing damage has been
one of the widely adopted methods in the SHM/NDE community [6, 7, 8]. Acoustic
emissions are manifest when a material is subject to extreme stress conditions due
to external loads, such that a local point source within the material suddenly releases
irreversible energy in the form of stress waves. The released stress waves are transmitted
to the surface of the material and then propagate outwards from the epicenter of the
release source. Previous studies on acoustic emission have focused mostly on the onset
of such acoustic emissions to locate their release sources [9, 10, 11, 12]. However, more
useful can be that acoustic emissions are also attenuated, scattered, or reﬂected by
discontinuities present in the material [8]. We identify that it is this particular property
of acoustic emissions that can be exploited in order to detect and localize pre-existing
damage in an inspection medium.

In this study, we experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of visualizing stress
waves in an aluminum plate using acoustic emissions. The focus is whether acoustic
emission techniques can capture the scattering of stress waves due to the presence of
damage resulting from an applied impact on the plate. For visualizing such transient
events, we employ a device – referred to as an acoustic or sound camera – that embeds an
optical lens at the center and arrays of microphones around the optical lens in a helical
pattern [21]. Note that arrays of microphones have been used in previous studies to
identify the locations of vibration sources [13], but it has not been thoroughly explored
yet to visualize stress waves in structures via air-coupled microphone sensors to the best
of the authors’ knowledge. This is because of a short characteristic time – in the order
of micro-seconds – of stress waves propagating in solids and also due to the diﬃculty in
capturing and visualizing the wavefronts of these stress waves.

To address the challenges associated with stress wave visualization, we implement
time-domain delay-sum beamforming techniques [14] based on acoustic emission
information collected from the arrays of microphones. To enhance the accuracy of the
diagnostic scheme, we conduct parametric studies on various post-processing conditions,
including the temporal resolution of the sensor data and the spatial resolution of the
inspection plate. Finally, the developed technique is evaluated for SHM/NDE purposes
with capabilities assessed for detecting the defect location simulated with a mass placed
in the path of the wave propagation on the inspection plate.

The acoustic emission beamforming technique coupled with the sound camera

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

3

device has unique advantages compared to the conventional techniques such as ultrasonic
or laser based testing methods [6]. Many of the conventional testing methods are
founded on the principle of imparting external stimuli or excitations on the inspection
material and measuring diﬀerences in the received signal in order to detect whether
damage is present and where it is located. While such methods generally provide highly
accurate results, they often involve slow and expensive processes to operate equipment.
Conversely, acoustic emission beamforming methods can be conducted in situ and
in real time, without necessitating permanently mounted contact sensors or baseline
data. Recently, laser Doppler vibrometry has gained signiﬁcant attention as a means
to visualize stress waves in solids and structures with an unprecedented resolution [15,
16, 17]. However, this method requires synchronization and reconstruction of data
measured from every single discretized spatial point of an inspection medium. This
is not practical given the diﬃculties in exciting structures in a repeated,
identical
fashion. Digital image correlation techniques can also visualize extremely dynamic
motions, but they require speckle patterns on specimens and their ﬁeld of view can
be often narrow for recording high speed events [18]. In contrast, the proposed acoustic
emission beamforming technique is capable of conducting non-contact – yet full-ﬁeld
– visualization of inspection medium in a single shot measurement. Consequently, we
envision that this method can open new avenues to diagnosing the existence of damage
in structures in a time- and cost-eﬃcient manner by conducting simple tests.

The contents of this manuscript will address the following topics. Section 2 contains
an introduction to the time-domain delay-sum beamforming theory and a discussion of
how this concept is incorporated into the study contained herein. Section 3 describes
the experimental setup used for monitoring inspection plates and tracking stress waves
using the sound camera. Section 4 provides an analysis of parametric studies performed
on pristine plates that were used to determine temporospatial resolutions necessary for
capabilities-centric analyses. Finally, Section 5 concludes the study with an analysis of
the acoustic emission beamforming method for identifying varying impact locations and
detecting simulated damage on the inspection plate.

2. Theoretical background

Traditional methods of source localization via air-coupled acoustic emission rely on the
assumption that the recording device is pointed at or aimed in the general vicinity of the
emission origin. Acoustic beamforming is an attractive alternative for use in acoustic
feedback NDE as it provides the opportunity to detect the direction of unknown acoustic
emissions associated with failure events across a large spatial domain [19]. While
acoustic beamforming is a relatively new concept for applications related to damage
localization, beamforming using microphone arrays is a standard practice for spatial
isolation of sound sources. The beamforming method – also known as microphone
antenna, phased array of microphones, acoustic telescope, or acoustic camera – is used
extensively for localizing sounds on moving objects and to ﬁlter out background noise

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

4

in acoustically active environments with stationary sound sources [20].

Figure 1 gives a visual representation of the basic delay-sum beamforming method.
This process can be expressed mathematically by Eq. (1) in terms of the time-domain
delay-sum beamforming output [14]:

N(cid:88)

−→
X P ) =

B(t,

ansn[t − τn(

−→
X P )]

(1)

n=1

−→
where N is the total number of microphones, t
X P represents the
position onto inspection plate with respect to the reference position (e.g., center of the
microphone arrays as shown in the ﬁgure). an is a spatial shading or weight coeﬃcient
that can be applied to the individual microphones to control mainlobe width and sidelobe
levels [14]. In many instances, the weighting coeﬃcients are set to unity or equal to one.
sn(t) represents the acoustic emission received by the n-th microphone emitted by an
arbitrary sound source.

is time, and

After receiving the signal, a speciﬁed delay, τn, is imposed to the signal for each
individual microphone based on the spatial domain. Figure 1 shows the operation used
for calculating the microphone delays. First, the spatial domain of interest is discretized
−→
into “pixels” rendering a superimposed grid onto the spatial domain. Second, for each
X p from the predetermined reference
point on the spatial domain the position vector
−→
point is calculated. Then, the position vector of that same spatial pixel from the n-th
microphone whose position is given by
M n. Finally,
the diﬀerence of ﬂight time of the acoustic signal between the two vectors is found by
calculating the diﬀerence in vector magnitudes and dividing the speed of sound c. That
is, the time delay for each point on the inspection plate and each n-th microphone is
deﬁned by:

−→
M n is determined as

−→
X n =

−→
X p -

(cid:16)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)−→

X p

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) −(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)−→

X n

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:17)

−→
X P ) =

τn(

1
c

.

(2)

Figure 1. Illustrations showing (a) location vectors of reference point, microphones,
and inspection points; and (b) concept of calculating delays for a speciﬁc microphone
for a given spatial position.

The scanning algorithm of the microphone array will perform the delay calculation
operation for the entirety of the spatial domain which it is monitoring. After the

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

5

time delays for all microphones are imposed on the signal for a given spatial pixel,
the transformed signal from each microphone is summed as shown in Figure 1b. The
location of the sound source is determined by the delays for a speciﬁc spatial location
which produced the maximum beam output, B(t).
It is important to note that the
microphone delays are time independent and therefore will remain constant for a given
microphone to a given spatial pixel throughout the monitoring period assuming the
geometry of the test setup remains constant. While Figure 1 and Equation 1 illustrate
the basic delay-sum beamformer in the time-domain, there exist many variations and
modiﬁcations to this algorithm, see reference [14].

3. Experimental setup

For the study presented herein, we used a commercial acoustic emission sensing device
equipped with microphone arrays and a motion camera (SeeSV-S205 Sound Camera,
SM Instruments) [21]. Speciﬁcally, the sensing device consisted of a high resolution
optical camera with a sampling rate of 25 frames per second (FPS) located in the center
of the device. The optical camera is surrounded by 30 high sensitivity digital micro-
electric mechanical system (MEMS) microphones with a sampling frequency of 25.6 kHz
arranged in ﬁve helical patterns of six microphones each as shown in Figure 2a. The
ﬁgure inset shows a digital image of embedded microphones along with the optical lens.
Figure 2b shows the experimental setup used in this study to induce and track the
transient waves in the aluminum plate. The images show the 1.2 m × 1.2 m × 1.02
mm 6061-T6 aluminum plate mounted to an optical table using a rail system to create
a ﬁxed boundary condition around the plate. The plate was secured between the angle
bars and the square tube with fasteners placed every six inches that went through all
pieces to eﬀectively ﬁx the boundary of the plate and suspend it above the optical table.

Figure 2. (a) Arrangement of 30 MEMS microphones and an optical camera. Inset
shows a digital image of the sound camera.
(b) Proposed experimental setup for
inducing and tracking transient waves in an aluminum plate using the sound camera.

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

6

Once the plate was installed, the acoustic camera was mounted above the
center of the plate at a height of 0.52 m as shown in Figure 2b.
Impacts
were introduced into the plate via manually tapping the plate using the tip of a
hexagonal wrench while simultaneously capturing the acoustic signal recorded by the 30
microphones. Afterwards, post-processing was performed to calculate the time delays
and beamforming output based on Equations (1) and (2) in order to produce the acoustic
images.

4. Parametric studies on pristine plates

In this study diﬀerent parameters were systematically varied to investigate and assess the
wave propagation tracking capabilities of the sound camera in addition to determining
post-processing parameters used in subsequent analyses. These parameters included the
temporal and spatial resolutions in post-processing. This section discusses the results
from these parametric studies given pristine plates. For all images shown of the wave
propagation tracking, the area presented in the image represents that of the entire
inspection plate.

4.1. Eﬀects of temporal resolution

The temporal resolution was investigated with the goal of achieving a smooth
propagation of the transient wave front.
In this study, the sound camera MEMS
microphones imposed a hardware limitation on the sampling frequency restricting it
to 25.6 kHz. This meant the time between individual samples was slightly greater than
39 µs. During investigation of wave propagation velocities, the speed of major ﬂexural
waves propagating in the 1.02 mm thick plate was approximately 1,700 m/s (to be
further discussed below). At this wave speed and the given sampling frequency, the
wave front propagated approximately 66.4 mm between each sample or 5.4% of the
total plate width, resulting in a very coarse propagation tracking ability.

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

7

Figure 3. Eﬀects of changing temporal resolution using interpolation of results in
frequency domain.(a) Original temporal data and the post-processed surface maps
showing stress wave propagation at t = 0, 0.20, and 0.31 ms. (b) Interpolated temporal
data and the post-processed surface maps showing stress wave propagation at t =
0, 0.20, and 0.31 ms. For all surface maps, the spatial resolution was ﬁxed at 30
mm between adjacent pixels. The colorbar at the bottom shows the intensity of the
beamforming output in Pa.

To reduce the eﬀective propagation distance between sequential samples and to
improve the resolution of the wave propagation tracking, an interpolation of the raw
acoustic signal was performed. Figure 3a shows a window of the raw signal with no
interpolation applied (left panel), in which we observe the drastic amplitude changes of
pressure measured from a microphone between subsequent samples. The beamforming
results of the stress wave propagation for the raw signal without interpolation are shown
in the three images to the right of the signal. The inset image at t = 0 ms in Figure 3a
represents the top left impact induced in the inspection plate.

Figure 3b shows the same raw signal as the one above it, but with a frequency-
domain fast fourier transformation interpolation applied to reconstruct the signal. An
upsample factor of 10 was chosen for the interpolation in order to decrease the time
between samples to 3.9 µs. This meant that the propagation distance between samples
was reduced to 6.6 mm and only 0.5% of the total plate width. The drastic eﬀects of
the interpolation are seen in the series of images to the right of the second signal.

Comparing the two sets of images presented in Figure 3, we ﬁnd that both
approaches successfully identify the impact location with a reasonably high accuracy
(to be further discussed in the later section). However, the results from the raw signal
do not show clear boundaries of wave front while the second set of images associated with
the interpolated data show the increased deﬁnition of the wave front. Additionally, a
signiﬁcant amount of acoustic background noise was removed in the case of interpolation,

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

8

which resulted in a reﬁned beamforming image. Looking at t = 0.20 ms in Figure 3,
it is clear that the wave front amplitude is reduced in the reconstructed signal image.
The decreased amplitude is due to the more accurate representation of the wave front
shape resulting from the interpolation of the acoustic signal. This reduces exaggerated
pressure amplitude changes observed from the original acoustic signal.

While the resolution of the wave propagation was achieved by increasing the
upsample factor, a computational penalty was incurred. Based on parametric studies
on diﬀerent upsample factors, the upsample-computational time relationship was
approximately linear with an increase in computational time. Speciﬁcally, for the
upsample factor of n, the beamforming computational time is increased (0.1044 ±
0.014) × n times compared to the original raw signal. The reduced computational
eﬃciency was deemed an acceptable cost for the increased resolution gained using
the reconstructed signal and necessary for identifying and localizing masses. For all
subsequent simulations, we used an upsample factor of 10.

4.2. Eﬀects of spatial resolution

Now we investigate the eﬀect of spatial resolution in an attempt to further reﬁne
the wave front throughout the propagation time. Figure 4 shows the results of the
spatial resolution study. Here the spatial resolution was systematically halved for each
simulation throughout the parametric study. Figure 4a and subsequent beamforming
images show the results for a spatial resolution (∆X) of 80 mm between pixels. While
the impact point in the surface map is well localized (compare with the actual impact
location as shown in the inset image), the wave front becomes blurry as it begins to
propagate into the far-ﬁeld as seen at times t = 0.21 ms and t = 0.32 ms.

Figures 4b-c and associated images show spatial resolutions of 40 mm and 20 mm
between pixels, respectively. Both sets of images show an accurate impact localization
and increased deﬁnition of the wave front as the spatial resolution increases. Figure 4d
and corresponding wave propagation images represent the case of ∆X = 10 mm between
pixels. Compared to all previous results, these images show a very deﬁnitive wave front
at t = 0.21 ms. The image at t = 0.32 ms for a spatial resolution of 10 mm solidiﬁes
that increased spatial resolution can maintain the wave front deﬁnition into the far-ﬁeld
of the plate while post-impact saturation behind the wave front clearly emanates from
the impact location.

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

9

Figure 4. Eﬀects of changing spatial resolution by decreasing step size between
“pixels” on virtual inspection plane. Left column shows spatial resolution, while the
next three right columns show surface maps of wave propagation for t = 0, 0.21, and
0.31 ms under the spatial resolution of (a) ∆X = 80 mm; (b) 40 mm; (c) 20 mm; and
(d) 10 mm.

While a 10 mm displacement between adjacent pixels may be excessive by creating
ripples,
it increases the chance of detecting an artiﬁcially created damage (to be
discussed in Section 5) and accurately determining its location. However for each
halving of the spatial resolution, the computational time is increased by a factor of
approximately 4.25, thereby resulting in an approximately power-law relationship equal
to (2.08 ± 0.042) increase in computational time as the spatial resolution is increased
(that is ∆X decreases). The power-law relationship is due to the spatial resolution
aﬀecting both dimensions of the inspection plate meaning that the increase in spatial
resolution is squared with each iteration. While this leads to a signiﬁcant increase in
computational time, the increase was again considered as an acceptable trade-oﬀ for
the gained wave propagation resolution. This would prove necessary for detecting and

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

10

localizing artiﬁcially created damage on the plate in subsequent analyses. Following the
temporal and spatial resolution studies, a temporal upsample factor of 10 and a spatial
resolution of 10 mm were selected for use in all following analyses.

5. Feasibility studies on the applications to NDE/SHM

In this section, we assess the feasibility of using the beamforming-based sound camera
technique for (i) identifying impact location for real-time SHM applications and (ii)
detecting artiﬁcial damage location for potential NDE applications.

5.1. Identiﬁcation of impact location

Once simulation parameters were determined, tests were performed to characterize
detection and localization capabilities of the sound camera. Prior to masses being
placed on the plate, it was necessary to determine if diﬀerent impact locations could be
identiﬁed since a single impact location in the top left corner of the plate had been used
for all previous parametric studies. Additionally, these tests would serve as the ﬁrst
quantitative indication of the detection and localization capabilities. Figure 5 shows
the qualitative results of the impact location study.

Figure 5.
Impact locations (top row) and post-processing results (bottom row)
showing impact detection capability of the sound camera and beamforming algorithm.
Location of impact was varied in four cases: (a) top left, (b) top right, (c) bottom
right, and (d) bottom left.

Figure 5a-d show the beamforming images at the moment of impact for impacts
located in the four corners of the plate. With the center of the inspection plate above
which the camera is suspended deﬁned as the origin of the plate, the actual measured

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

11

Table 1. Quantiﬁcation of impact localization.

Impact
Location

Actual
Position [m,m]

Identiﬁed
Position [m,m]

Absolute
Diﬀerence [m]

Normalized
Error [Num. Pixels]

Top Left
Top Right
Bottom Right
Bottom Left

(-0.3032,0.3048)
(0.3048,0.3064)
(0.3056,-0.3064)
(-0.3040,-0.3056)

(-0.2743,0.3251)
(0.3556,0.3150)
(0.3150,-0.3251)
(-0.2946,-0.2946)

0.0353
0.0515
0.0209
0.0145

3.53
5.15
2.09
1.45

impact locations are given in Table 1. For each of the impact locations shown, the
images suggest that the impact location is properly identiﬁed and localized using the
sound camera and beamforming algorithm. The images shown were used to identify the
point of maximum amplitude at the instant of impact which was deﬁned as the impact
location. These identiﬁed locations are given as the identiﬁed locations in Table 1.

We quantify the percent error between the actual and identiﬁed impact locations

as below:

N ormalizedError =

(cid:113)
(Xactual − Xidentif ied)2 + (Yactual − Yidentif ied)2

∆X

, (3)

where ∆X represents the pixel size. Looking at actual and identiﬁed positions in Table
1 (i.e., (Xactual, Yactual) and (Xidentif ied, Yidentif ied)), it is observed that all impacts were
located relatively accurately with regards to identiﬁed positions being in the general
vicinity of the actual known position of the impact. Using Equation 3, the normalized
error in terms of number of pixels between the actual and identiﬁed impact locations
with respect to the spatial discretization was calculated. The calculated errors are given
in Table 1. Given the ∆X of 10 mm used for this study, the normalized error between
the actual and identiﬁed impact locations represent diﬀerences ranging from 14.5 mm to
51.5 mm as shown in Table 1. The largest error was calculated for the top right impact
location and found to be 5.15 pixels or approximately 4.22% of the plate width. This
means that, with respect to the total spatial domain in this case, the localization was still
relatively accurate. The larger errors could be attributed to not a ﬁne enough spatial
resolution which leads to a larger error between the actual and identiﬁed locations.
Additionally, the larger error values could be due to human error when initiating the
impacts on the plate. Impacts were incited by manually tapping the inspection plate
at predetermined locations which are noted as the actual impact locations. However, if
the impact on the plate were not located at precisely these locations, this would greatly
aﬀect the error values as the identiﬁed impact location is based oﬀ experimental data
which assumes the impact is imparted at the actual location. Despite some seemingly
large error values between actual and identiﬁed impact locations this study indicates
the sound camera and beamforming algorithm were able to fairly accurately localize
diﬀerent impact locations and track the resultant transient wave across the plate.

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

12

5.2. Identiﬁcation of pre-existing artiﬁcial damage

Once it was established that the sound camera could detect and suﬃciently track the
transient wave, the impact location was ﬁxed and masses were added to the plate to
determine the capability of the sound camera and beamforming algorithm to detect the
discontinuities which represented psuedo-damage cases. The impact location used is a
top left impact as shown in Figure 6a-b. The mass used for this study was a 0.615 kg,
0.0635 m × 0.0635 m × 0.0196 m stainless steel block. The mass was aﬃxed to the
inspection plate using silicon sealant tape that was applied to the entire contact surface
of the mass. The use of masses to simulate damage has been used on many occasions
to assess the capabilities of diﬀerent SHM/NDE techniques [22, 23]. Figure 6b shows
the mass was place halfway between the impact location and the center of the plate
meaning the mass was approximately 0.215 m from the impact location. Figure 6 shows
the wave propagation results for the inspection plate without and with mass present.

Figure 6. Beamforming results for plate without and with mass. Results suggest that
sound camera using acoustic beamforming can be used for detection of discontinuities.

Figure 6 uses a red cross and a red square to mark the approximate location of
the impact and mass, respectively, on the plate. At t = 0 ms, the instant of impact
is shown for both the without- and with-mass cases. In these images look very similar
between the two cases and there is no indication of a mass being present on the plate.
The images at t = 0.25 ms show the wave front just after it has propagated past the
location of the mass. The ﬁrst diﬀerence is seen in the wave front deﬁnition. While the
no-mass case maintains a smooth and symmetric wave front, the mass case displays a
more turbulent wave front with a ﬂatten of the wave front on the far side of the mass
relative to the impact point. Additionally, the widespread saturation behind the wave
front seen in the no-mass case is not seen in the with-mass case. In the with-mass case,

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

13

Table 2. Quantiﬁcation of mass detection and localization capability.

Mass
Location

Actual
Position [m,m]

Identiﬁed
Position [m,m]

Absolute
Diﬀerence [m]

Normalized
Error [Num. Pixels]

Point 1

(-0.1524,0.1524)

(-0.1219,0.193)

0.0508

5.08

the area behind the wave front maintains a higher acoustic level throughout compared
to the no-mass case contributing to the less deﬁned wave front. Finally, there is much
more acoustic noise in the farﬁeld of the plate for the with-mass case compared to the
no-mass case where the farﬁeld acoustic level is approximately equal to the behind the
wave front at t = 0.25 ms.

At t = 0.34 ms, the most noticeable diﬀerence between the no-mass and with-mass
cases is the high amplitude acoustic event present at the location of the mass in the
second case. For the no-mass case, the wave front is losing amplitude and deﬁnition
as it propagates and dissipates into the farﬁeld and the area behind the wave front is
becoming saturated with low amplitude acoustic levels. However, the backside of the
wave front remains very symmetric with respect to the impact location and there is very
little excessive acoustic features seen on the plate. In the with-mass case, the overall
wave front condition appears very similar to that for the no-mass case.
In terms of
dissipation and primary acoustic features, the wave fronts for the two cases display very
similar amplitudes and structures at t = 0.34 ms. However, despite the similarities the
with-mass case wave front retains a much less reﬁned wave front at this instance with
much more acoustic noise seen in the farﬁeld of the plate. As aforementioned, the most
observable and desirable diﬀerence is the presence of the acoustic event emanating from
the mass location denoted by the red arrow in Figure 6 which alludes to the presence
of a discontinuity at this location on the inspection plate.

Similar to the impact localization, the maximum amplitude of the acoustic feature
near the known location of the mass was used as the identifying location of the mass.
This was then compared to the actual location of the mass given in Table 2 and
using Equation 3 the normalized error was calculated between the actual and identiﬁed
position with respect to the spatial discretization. The calculated error of only 5 spatial
pixels represents a fairly high degree of accuracy when identifying the known position
of the mass. Given that the mass is 63.5 mm × 63.5 mm, the mass itself is 6.35 pixels
× 6.35 pixels. While the exact coordinates of the actual and identiﬁed positions do
not necessarily correlate, it is likely aﬀected by the acoustic feedback from the mass
not emanating from the center of the block. Therefore, if the maximum amplitude
were located at one of the points of the mass as it seems to be in Figure 6 (corner
nearest top edge of plate), this alone would considerably aﬀect the error value. Given
the normalized dimensions of the mass, the identiﬁed position of the acoustic emission
denoting the location of the mass is likely within the bounds of the mass despite the
relatively large normalized error.

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

14

6. Conclusions

This study demonstrated the visualization of stress wave propagation across an
aluminum plate using an air-couple microphone array. The scope of the beamforming
method for visualizing stress waves was investigated through various parametric studies
that resulted in the establishment of post-processing parameters of upsample factor
and spatial resolution for further testing. Subsequent testing revealed the ability of
the sound camera to accurately identify various impact locations on the inspection
plate. Finally, the beamforming method was used to detect and localize a mass on
the inspection plate used to simulate the presence of damage. The sound camera and
derived beamforming method were able to relatively accurately locate the position of the
mass through the detection of acoustic emission structures indicating the existence of a
discontinuity on the inspection plate. This study showed the potential for an acoustic
emission beamforming based method to be used for damage detection in SHM/NDE
applications. While this study focused on the feasibility of the proposed technique,
further studies need to be conducted to ﬁnd more sophisticated beamforming techniques
and to optimize their post-processing parameters. Corresponding experiments will be
also conducted in comparison to other experimental techniques, such as laser Doppler
vibrometry and digital image correlation techniques. Lastly, the authors also plan to
perform numerical studies of air-coupled acoustic emission events using ﬁnite element
analysis.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by INNOPOLIS Foundation grant funded by the Korean
government (Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning, Grant number: 14DDI084)
through SM Instruments Inc. We also acknowledge the research grant from the Joint
Center for Aerospace Technology Innovation (JCATI) from Washington State in the
USA. We thank researchers at SM Instruments, including InKwon Kim and JunGoo
Kang, for their technical assistance.

References

[1] Giurgiutiu V 2015 Structural Health Monitoring of Aerospace Composites (Academic Press).
[2] Johnson S B 2011 System Health Management: With Aerospace Applications (John Wiley & Sons,

Ltd)

[3] Wang M L, Lynch J P, Sohn H 2014 Sensor Technologies for Civil Infrastructures: Applications in

Structural Health Monitoring (Woodhead Publishing)

[4] The American Society for Nondestructive Testing, Introduction to Nondestructive Testing, Web,

2015.

[5] B. Boro Djordjevic, Nondestructive Test Technology for the Composites, The 10th International
Conference of the Slovenian Society for Non-Destructive Testing, pages 259-265, Materials and
Sensors Technologies Inc., 2015.

[6] NDT Resource Center, Introduction to Acoustic Emission Testing, National Science Foundation -

Advanced Technological Education.

Visualization of Stress Waves via Air-Coupled Acoustic Emission Sensors

15

[7] P Rizzo, F Lanza di Scalea, Acoustic emission monitoring of carbon-ﬁber-reinforced-polymer bridge

stay cables in large-scale testing, Experimental Mechanics, 41:3, 282, 2001.

[8] Charles Hellier, Handbook of Nondestructive Evaluation: Chapter 10 - Acoustic Emission Testing,

McGraw Hill, 2nd Edition, 2012.

[9] Gregory C. McLaskey, Steven D. Glaser, Christian U. Grosse, Acoustic Emission Beamforming for
Enhanced Damage Detection, Sensors and Smart Structures Technologies for Civil, Mechanical,
and Aerospace Systems, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6932(39):1-9, 2008.

[10] Christian U. Grosse, Acoustic Emission Localization Methods for Large Structures Based on
Beamforming and Array Techniques, Non-Destructive Testing in Civil Engineering, Nantes, France,
2009.

[11] Steven E. Olson, Martin P. DeSimio, Mark M. Derriso, Beam Forming of Lamb Waves for
Structural Health Monitoring, The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Journal of Vibration
and Acoustics, Vol. 129(6):730-738, December 2007.

[12] Sanjay Sengupt, Aloke Kumar Datta, Pijush Topdar, Structural Damage Localisation by Acoustic
Emission Technique: A State of the Art Review, Latin American Journal of Solids and Structures,
Vol. 12(8):1565-1582, 2015.

[13] Robert P. Dougherty, Functional Beamforming, 5th Berlin Beamforming Conference, Berlin,

Germany, 2014.

[14] Ronald Mucci, A Comparison of Eﬃcient Beamforming Algorithms, IEEE Transactions on

Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing, 32(3):548-558, June 1984.

[15] M Ruzzene, Frequency?wavenumber domain ﬁltering for improved damage visualization, Smart

Materials and Structures 16 (6), 2116, 2007.

[16] F. Li, L. Zhao, Z. Tian, L. Yu, J. Yang, Visualization of solitary waves via laser Doppler vibrometry
for heavy impurity identiﬁcation in a granular chain, Smart Materials and Structures, 22 035016,
2013.

[17] J. Yang, M. Gonzalez, E. Kim, C. Agbasi, M. Sutton, Attenuation of solitary waves and localization
of breathers in 1D granular crystals visualized via high speed photography, Experimental Mechanics,
54: 1043, 2014.

[18] M. Sutton, J. Orteu, H Schreier,

Image correlation for shape, motion and deformation
measurements: basic concepts, theory and applications, Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
[19] Joe C Chen, Kung Yao, Ralph E Hudson, Acoustic Source Localization and Beamforming: Theory

and Practice, EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, 4:359-370, 2003.

[20] Ulf Michel, History of Acoustic Beamforming, Berlin Beamforming Conference (BeBeC), BeBeC-

2006, Berlin, Germany, November 2006.

[21] SM Instruments, SeeSV-S205 Portable Sound Camera Product Overview and Speciﬁcations, SM

Instruments Inc, Daejeon, Korea, August 2014.

[22] A. Kody, X. Li, B. Moaveni, Identiﬁcation of Physically Simulated Damage on a Footbridge Based
on Ambient Vibration Data, American Society of Civil Engineers Structures Congress 2013, 352-
362, 2013.

[23] Douglas Adams, Health Monitoring of Structural Materials and Components: Methods with

Applications, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex, England, 2007.

