6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
9
9
2
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

SUSY Dark Matter: Beyond the Standard Paradigm

Pearl Sandick1,a)

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112

a)Corresponding author: sandick@physics.utah.edu

Abstract. Within the framework of the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM), we explore a decoupling of the pa-
rameters into separate sectors that determine consistency with collider data, the abundance of dark matter, and potential signatures
at direct dark matter searches. We consider weak-scale bino-like neutralino dark matter, and ﬁnd that annihilations via light slepton
exchange present a viable mechanism for obtaining the appropriate dark matter abundance assuming a thermal history. Constraints
and prospects for discovery of these models are discussed, including the possibility that direct dark matter searches may be sen-
sitive to these models if light squarks exhibit left-right mixing. Diﬀerences between the scenarios presented here and the typical
expectations for the MSSM are discussed.

INTRODUCTION

Neutralino dark matter within the MSSM has long been among the most compelling candidates for particle dark mat-
ter. In many regions of the MSSM parameter space, and in well-motivated, UV-complete subsets of the MSSM, the
lightest neutralino is the lightest supersymmetric particle (LSP), and therefore assumed to be stable due to conser-
vation of R-parity. The abundance of the neutralino LSP, assuming that it’s a thermal relic, is typically within a few
orders of magnitude of the measured abundance of dark matter, Ωχh2 = 0.1196 ± 0.0031 [1], and in many cases ob-
tains an abundance in perfect agreement with the measured value. This promising scenario has led to much optimism
regarding the discovery prospects for supersymmetry and supersymmetric dark matter. However, no new supersym-
metric particles have yet been discovered at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), as no dark matter particles have yet
been discovered via direct or indirect dark matter searches. Null searches for supersymmetry and the discovery of the
Higgs boson with a mass of ∼ 125 GeV [2] seem to be pointing to the possibility that supersymmetric particles, if the
Universe is indeed supersymmetric, are, in general, at the TeV scale or beyond.
However, the current data clearly leave open the possibility of electroweak-scale sleptons [5, 6]. If thta is the case,
as will be shown here, it is possible to satisfy all collider constraints and obtain a Higgs boson with a mass of ∼ 125
GeV in models where the neutralino LSP is bino-like and a true weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP) dark
matter candidate [3]. Here we explore this scenario, the possibility that consistency with collider data and consistency
with the dark matter abundance can be obtained by considering two separate sectors of the MSSM parameter space,
as well as the related prospects for direct dark matter detection in these types of models [4].

MODEL AND CONSTRAINTS

While there are a plethora of observable quantities predicted within a supersymmetric model that, if diﬀerent from the
Standard Model (SM) expectation, would be evidence of supersymmetry or particle dark matter, there are currently no
convincing observations of any deviations from the SM. If we are driven by the desire for electroweak-scale WIMP
dark matter in an MSSM scenario consistent with collider constraints, we recognize that a very simple scenario
survives: singlet fermion dark matter coupled to SM fermions via charged scalars. Though this scenario, often termed
the “bulk” region of parameter space, has long been excluded in supersymmetric extensions of the SM such as the
constrained MSSM (CMSSM), in fact there is no conﬂict with collider data to date in the more general MSSM. Here
we re-open this region of parameter space for consideration, allowing a weak-scale bino dark matter candidate and
sleptons with masses (cid:38) 100 GeV [3] as allowed by current constraints [5, 6].

f /m2

There are, however, well-known obstacles to obtaining an appropriate dark matter abundance with a bino-like
LSP annihilating via light slepton exchange: namely, the fact that the s-wave part of the annihilation cross section is
typically chirality-suppressed by a factor ∼ m2
χ, while the p-wave part of the cross section is velocity-suppressed
by a factor v2 ≈ 0.1 at freeze-out. Together, these suppressions imply a dark matter annihilation cross section much
smaller than that required for the abundance to be consistent with measurements. Allowing for signiﬁcant left-right
mixing in the slepton sector, however, eliminates the chirality suppression, restoring the viability of bulk-type models
for explaining the observed abundance of dark matter. In fact, one can completely specify the physics relevant to
the relic density of dark matter by specifying the bino mass and slepton masses and mixings. We note that we con-
sider only annihilation via slepton exchange to SM leptons. In principle, one could also consider neutralino-slepton
coannihilation, which requires near degeneracy of the neutralino LSP with one of the sleptons, a much more “tuned”
situation than that explored here. In order to predict a light CP-even Higgs boson consistent with observations, there
must also be a heavy sector of parameter space, which includes, at a minimum, the Higgs mixing parameter, µ, some
heavy squark masses, and the top trilinear couplings. In practice the wino and gluino may also be decoupled, as well
as some of the sleptons.

Introducing left-right mixing in the slepton sector is not without consequence. Contributions to the electric and
magnetic dipole moments of the SM leptons arise as one-loop vertex corrections, with the bino and sleptons running
in the loop. Since dipole moment operators ﬂip the lepton helicity, these contributions can be large if left-right slepton
mixing is large. Within the SM, the leading order contributions to the electric dipole moments of the charged leptons
occur only at more than three loops [10] and are many orders of magnitude below the current constraints. As the
dipole moment contributions are dependent not only on the slepton mixing angle, but also on the CP-violating phase
(the electric dipole moment vanishes in the absence of CP-violation), we allow a CP-violating phase for the sleptons,
as well. The relic density sector now also completely speciﬁes the physics relevant for corrections to the lepton dipole
moments, and includes the bino mass, mχ, and the slepton masses, m˜(cid:96)1,2, mixing angles, α, and CP-violating phases,
ϕ. For simplicity, we consider each generation of sleptons separately, but we note that while the contributions to the
dipole moments are independent, the contributions to the annihilation cross section are additive.

DARK MATTER ABUNDANCE AND LEPTON DIPOLE MOMENTS

Because bino annihilation exhibits no s-channel resonances, one can expand (cid:104)σv(cid:105) in powers of T/mχ [11] as

(cid:104)σv(cid:105) ∼ c0 + c1

,

(1)

(cid:32) T

(cid:33)

mχ



(cid:34)
(cid:34)

(cid:32)
(cid:32)

where the second term on the right hand side is suppressed by the velocity squared, while c0 is the velocity-independent
s-wave contribution,

c0 =

m2
χ
2π

g4Y2

LY2

R cos2 α sin2 α

−

1
+ m2
χ

1
+ m2
χ

m2
˜(cid:96)2

m2
˜(cid:96)1

,

(2)

Here g is the hypercharge coupling and YL,R are the slepton hypercharges. For simplicity, we have taken the limit of
massless fermions, though the exact expressions for the annihilation cross section and the corrections to the dipole
moments are used in the following analysis. We see that the s-wave contribution to the annihilation cross section is
maximized for maximal left-right mixing, and vanishes in the absence of mixing or when the sleptons are degenerate.
2 , and the electric
dipole moment, d/|e|, of the associated lepton due to new physics are [12]

Again in the massless limit, the contributions to the anomalous magnetic moment, a = g−2

∆a =

m(cid:96)mχ
4π2m2
˜(cid:96)1

g2YLYR cos ϕ cos α sin α

1

2(1 − r1)2

1 + r1 +

2r1 ln r1
1 − r1

− (˜(cid:96)1 → ˜(cid:96)2)

(3)

and

mχ
8π2m2
˜(cid:96)1

g2YLYR sin ϕ cos α sin α

d
|e| =
where ri ≡ m2
. The corrections to the dipole moments also vanish in the absence of left-right mixing or when the
sleptons are degenerate. Comparing Equation 3 and Equation 4, we see that they have identical dependence on α, but
the dependence on ϕ is out of phase by π/2.

− (˜(cid:96)1 → ˜(cid:96)2),

2r1 ln r1
1 − r1

1

2(1 − r1)2

1 + r1 +

χ/m2
˜(cid:96)i

(4)

2

(cid:33)(cid:35)
(cid:33)(cid:35)

(a) Ωχh2

(b) (σv)ann. today /(10−26 cm3/s)

(c) ∆a

(d) 2mµdµ /|e|

= 120 GeV, and m˜µ2

FIGURE 1. The dependence of various observables on the smuon L-R mixing angle, α, and the CP-violating phase, ϕ, for mχ = 100
GeV, m˜µ1
= 300 GeV. In the upper two panels, we present the neutralino relic abundance (left) and the
neutralino annihilation cross section today (right). In the lower panels, we present the contribution to the anomalous magnetic (left)
and electric (right) dipole moments of the muon. In the darker red region in the lower left panel this model fully accounts for the
measured muon anomalous magnetic moment to 2σ, while the lighter red shaded region provides a contribution that is comparable
to the measured value in magnitude. In the lower right panel, the electric dipole moment is unconstrained everywhere in the plane.

In Figure 1 we present the dependence of the relevant constraints on the mixing angle, α, and the CP-violating
phase, ϕ, for a benchmark model with mχ = 100 GeV and light smuons with masses m˜µ1
= 300
GeV. The upper panels of Fig. 1 show (a) the neutralino relic abundance and (b) the annihilation cross section today,
with darker shading in each panel indicating a smaller value. As expected, larger mixing leads to a larger annihilation
cross section and therefore a smaller relic abundance of neutralinos, becoming consistent with the measured abundance
of dark matter near maximal mixing (α ≈ π/4). We note that the dependence on ϕ appears only in terms proportional

= 120 GeV and m˜µ2

>0.3<0.150p2p3p22p0p4p23p4pjaWch2>1.5<0.20p2p3p22p0p4p23p4pjaHsvLann.todayêH10-26cm3êsLto the fermion mass, and is therefore only marginally relevant even for annihilation to τ+τ−, when it can be as large
as a 5% eﬀect. The lower panels of Figure 1 show the constraints on (c) the anomalous magnetic moment and (d)
the electric dipole moment of the muon. In panel (d), darker shading indicates a larger correction, though all points
in the plane lie well below the sensitivity of current measurements of the electric dipole moment of the muon [9,
10]. In panel (c), the darker shading indicates the region in which the discrepancy in the measurement of the muon
anomalous magnetic moment [13] is resolved, while the lighter shaded region yields a contribution that is comparable
in magnitude to the current discrepancy (that is, the problem is not signiﬁcantly worsened in this region, while it
is signiﬁcantly worsened in the unshaded regions of the plane). As expected, the contributions to the lepton dipole
moments vanish in the absence of left-right mixing. For this benchmark point, the abundance of dark matter can be
obtained and the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon can be explained for nearly maximal left-right smuon
mixing and CP-violating phase of ϕ ≈ nπ/2 for n odd.
We note that the annihilation cross sections today displayed in the upper right panel of Figure 1 are quite close
to the typical “thermal cross section” of (σv)th = 3 × 10−26 cm3s−1, which are beginning to be probed by indirect
dark matter searches. Annihilation of 100 GeV WIMPs to µ+µ− with (σv) (cid:38) 2 × 10−26 cm3s−1 is currently excluded
by AMS-02 [7], while Fermi’s observations of dwarf galaxies put a strong constraint on annihilation to τ+τ−, which
reaches near (σv)th [8]. Unfortunately, indirect dark matter searches suﬀer from substantial astrophysical uncertainties,
resulting in possible ﬂuctuations of these constraints by a factor of a few in either direction. Nonetheless, indirect dark
matter searches may indeed provide the ﬁrst hints of these models, or may exclude them within the next few years.

In Figure 2, we present a summary of the constraints on these models for annihilation via (a) selectron exchange,
(b) smuon exchange, and (c) stau exchange, in each case with sleptons of the other two generations decoupled, where
mχ = 100 GeV and we have marginalized over m˜(cid:96)1 and m˜(cid:96)2. In each panel, the grey regions are excluded because the
relic density of neutralinos would exceed the measured dark matter abundance by more than 2σ, while the red and
blue shaded regions are allowed by constraints on the magnetic and electric dipole moments, respectively, for at least
one combination of m˜(cid:96)1 and m˜(cid:96)2. In all cases, thermal neutralino dark matter with mχ = 100 GeV can make up the
dark matter in the Universe if left-right slepton mixing is signiﬁcant. It is clear that the dipole moment constraints
on light selectrons eliminate selectron exchange as a viable mechanism for obtaining the appropriate dark matter
abundance. Even with another mechanism by which to obtain the dark matter abundance, α and ϕ must be highly
tuned if selectrons are light. The situation for light smuons is quite diﬀerent: the muon electric dipole moment does
not constrain α or ϕ, but measurements of the anomalous magnetic dipole moment of the muon require ϕ ≈ nπ/2,
with n odd. Neither the magnetic nor the electric dipole moments of the tau lepton constrain the parameter space for
the scenario with light staus, leaving ϕ free.

(a) light selectrons

(b) light smuons

(c) light staus

FIGURE 2. A summary of the constraints for annihilation via (a) selectron exchange, (b) smuon exchange, and (c) stau exchange
for mχ = 100 GeV. Greyed regions are excluded because the relic density of neutralinos would exceed the measured dark matter
abundance by more than 2σ, while the blue/red shaded regions indicate angles where at least one (m˜(cid:96)1 , m˜(cid:96)2) mass combination pro-
duces an electric/magnetic dipole moment within the current bounds. Purple regions indicate that both dipole moment constraints
are simultaneously satisﬁed.

This scenario exhibits a few important departures from the standard expectations for neutralino dark matter within
the MSSM. Most importantly, a thermal abundance of neutralino dark matter can be obtained via exchange of light

0Π2Π3Π22Π0Π4Π23Π4Π(cid:106)Α0Π2Π3Π22Π0Π4Π23Π4Π(cid:106)Α0Π2Π3Π22Π0Π4Π23Π4Π(cid:106)Αscalars, i.e. the “bulk” mechanism. We have obtained this result in a scenario with a simpliﬁed relic density sector,
allowing the satisfaction of all other constraints by invoking a heavy sector of supersymmetric parameters. This model
can therefore be considered a minimal version of the MSSM with leptophilic dark matter.

Regarding detectability, this region of the MSSM parameter space gives rise to many distinctive signatures.
Speciﬁcally, indirect dark matter searches may soon probe these models. Lepton dipole moment constraints imply
that only for annihilation to µ+µ− and τ+τ− can the annihilation cross section today be large enough for a potential
signal in an indirect dark matter search, and, furthermore, for annihilation to µ+µ− that would imply large CP-violation
in the smuon sector. We ﬁnd that this mechanism only works for mediating sleptons lighter than ∼ 150 GeV, making
this a well-deﬁned region with quite small slepton masses for collider searches to target. However, with typical mass
−mχ ∼ 10 to 50 GeV, this may be a particularly challenging scenario to probe. If annihilation proceeds
splittings of m˜(cid:96)1
primarily to τ+τ−, the branching fraction of the light CP-even Higgs to photons may be aﬀected [14]. Interestingly,
if the mass of the lightest slepton can be constrained to be larger than ∼ 150 GeV, then it would not be possible to
explain the observed dark matter abundance without invoking coannihilations or resonant annihilations in the early
Universe and/or a non-trivial wino/Higgsino fraction for the LSP.

DIRECT DARK MATTER SEARCHES

If the neutralino LSP is a pure bino, scattering with nuclei can happen solely via squark exchange. In the absence of
left-right mixing in the squark sector, this scattering is either spin-dependent or velocity-suppressed. In either case, it is
unlikely to be observed in direct dark matter searches. However, if there is substantial left-right squark mixing, there is
a velocity-independent contribution to the spin-independent neutralino-nucleon elastic scattering cross section. Thus
far, we have considered squarks to be decoupled so as to satisfy collider constraints, however these constraints still
leave open the possibility that some squarks are quite light. For one non-degenerate light ﬂavor squark and mχ = 100
(cid:38) 500 GeV [15, 16]. In this case, the relic abundance of dark matter, if obtained via the mechanism described
GeV, m˜q1
above, would be unaﬀected, but signiﬁcant scattering with nuclei may be expected. Furthermore, if the neutralino LSP
is signiﬁcantly heavier than 100 GeV such that slepton exchange is not adequate to achieve the measured abundance
of dark matter, it is still possible that the abundance is achieved through neutralino-squark coannihilations. In this
section we brieﬂy investigate neutralino-nucleon scattering, which we may describe with a third decoupled sector of
the MSSM parameter space, speciﬁed by the bino mass, mχ, the light squark masses, m˜q1,2, and the squark left-right
mixing angle, φq [4]. As above, we consider the cases of light up, down, and strange squarks separately.

For the momentum transfer relevant for WIMP-nucleon elastic scattering, the scattering operator can be repre-
sented as a WIMP-quark four-point contact interaction, leading to the well-known result for the elastic scattering cross
section [17]

(cid:88)

q

σN
SI

=

µ2
4π

g(cid:48)4Y2

L



sin(2φ˜q)YRq

−

1
− m2
˜χ)

1
− m2
˜χ)

(m2
˜q2

(m2
˜q1

q )λq

,

(5)

 (BN

2

where, as above, g and YL,R are the hypercharge coupling and hypercharges of the left- and right-handed quarks, µ is
the reduced mass of the WIMP-nucleon system, BN
q are the integrated nucleon form factors for quarks q = u, d, s and
nucleons N = p, n, and the factor λq accounts for the running of the scattering operator O from the weak scale (∼ mZ)
to the nucleon scale µ. Three independent parameters are necessary to specify the light quark content of the nucleon;
the proton or neutron form factors,

u = Bp
Bn
or, perhaps more conveniently, the parameters

d , Bn
d

= Bp

u , and Bn

s = Bp
s ,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
(cid:16)
ΣπN ≡ mu + md
u + BN
BN
d
d − 2BN
u + BN
BN
2
u − Bp
z ≡ Bp
d − Bp
Bp

2
σ0 ≡ mu + md

s
s

,

,

s

(6)

(cid:17)

,

(7)

where ΣπN can be determined from pion-nucleon scattering data, but with large uncertainties, σ0 can be ﬁt from the
baryon masses in chiral perturbation theory or inferred from lattice QCD studies, but with large discrepancies between
methods, and z is calculated purely from baryon octet mass diﬀerences, with the result z = 1.49 with negligible

uncertainties. To summarize, the values of the BN
q in Equation 5 are highly uncertain. Furthermore, we note that it
is only in the case of light strange squarks, with up and down squarks decoupled, that dark matter will scatter with
the same cross section on protons and neutrons (Bp
s). In all other cases, scattering will be generically “isospin
violating,” and limits from direct dark matter searches must be recalculated rather than directly applied.

s = Bn

s to be smaller. We note that this “minimal” value of BN

In Figure 3 we present the direct detection sensitivity for a benchmark case in which bino-like neutralinos scatter
with nuclei via strange squark exchange. Here we allow only one light squark, m ˜s1, decoupling the heavier strange
squark with m ˜s2
= 10 TeV, and assume maximal mixing, sin(2φ ˜s) = 1 (note that results scale with sin(2φ ˜s) as
in Equation 5). In Fig. 3(a), we plot the spin-independent neutralino-nucleon elastic scattering cross section as a
function of mχ to illustrate the dependence of the predicted cross section on the form factors, BN
s . The green shaded
region demonstrates this variation of the predicted scattering cross section: The dark shaded band indicates the 2σ
uncertainty in the measured value of ΣπN [18] assuming a minimal value of σ0 = 27 MeV, while the light shaded
band extends down to BN
s = 0.5, at which point the strange quark content of the nucleon is equivalent to the heavy
quark content, and, as such, one would not expect BN
s is in fact
larger than the value favored by lattice calculations and the default value used by micrOMEGAS versions 3.0 through
3.5.5 [19]. The uncertainty in the scattering cross section due to the uncertain quark content of the nucleon extends
over two orders of magnitude. We also plot the current upper limit on the WIMP-nucleon scattering cross section from
LUX [20] as a solid black contour, the projected sensitivity of LUX with 300 days of data as a red dashed contour,
and the projected sensitivity of the LZ-7 experiment [21] as a blue dot-dashed contour. One can see that conclusions
regarding the detectability of a particular model are strongly dependent on the strange quark content of the nucleon.
In Figure 3(b) we plot the sensitivity of LUX and LZ in the (mχ, m ˜s1) plane. The lower right half of the plane
is excluded as there would be a squark LSP. The region below the thin black contour is currently excluded by LUX,
while the red dashed and blue dot-dashed contours indicate projected sensitivities as in the left panel. Here we have
ﬁxed BN
s = 0.5, the smallest value we would reasonably expect. Even in this case, LZ will be sensitive to scattering
(cid:38) 3.2 TeV. In fact, for mχ ≈ 100 GeV, LZ will be sensitive to scattering for
via squark exchange so long as m ˜s1
squarks lighter than ∼ 5 TeV, and potentially to even heavier squarks if the light squark and neutralino LSP are nearly
degenerate. Even for the conservative value of BN
s = 0.5, direct dark matter searches will be sensitive to models in
which the lightest colored superpartners are multi-TeV squarks with masses potentially well beyond the reach of the
LHC operating at a center-of-mass energy of 14 TeV [22]. If heavy QCD-charged particles couple to dark matter, the
ﬁrst evidence may come from direct dark matter searches.

Again, this scenario contains many important departures from the standard MSSM expectation. We have intro-
duced an explicit scenario where squark exchange dominates spin-independent elastic scattering of neutralino dark
matter with nuclei, whereas in the MSSM it is typical that Higgs-exchange dominates. In the MSSM it is usually
assumed that left-right mixing is negligible for light squarks (i.e. minimal ﬂavor violation), so that the scattering is
basically isospin invariant. Here, however, the scattering is generically isospin-violating, with the exception of the
case where only strange squarks are light enough to participate signiﬁcantly in the scattering.

CONCLUSIONS

While searches for supersymmetry and dark matter continue to return null results, we must look closely at models that
evade constraints. There are viable models within the MSSM with electroweak-scale neutralino dark matter, many of
which exhibit distinctive signatures in colliders and direct and indirect dark matter searches. Here, we have discussed
two such scenarios, each with singlet fermion dark matter (a bino-like neutralino) coupled to SM fermions via charged
scalars. A bulk-like model with light sleptons and a ∼ 100 GeV bino-like neutralino LSP may explain the abundance
of dark matter, while scattering with nuclei may very well proceed via squark exchange, each scenario enabled by
left-right mixing among the relevant sleptons or squarks. In the former case, indirect dark matter searches may be the
key, while in the latter case, direct dark matter searches may be the ﬁrst to provide evidence of physics beyond the SM
(and will be signiﬁcantly more powerful tools with an improved understanding of the quark content of the nucleon).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work of P. Sandick is supported in part by NSF Grant No. PHY-1417367. P.S. would also like to thank her
collaborators on these projects and others, K. Fukushima, C. Kelso, J. Kumar, P. Stengel, and T. Yamamoto.

(a) Sensitivity to Strangeness Content of Nucleon

(b) Squark Mass Reach

FIGURE 3. Direct detection sensitivity for a benchmark case in which bino-like neutralinos scatter with nuclei via strange squark
exchange. Here we assume only one light squark, m ˜s1, decoupling the heavier strange squark with m ˜s2
= 10 TeV as well as the other
squarks, and maximal left-right mixing, sin(2φ ˜s) = 1. Panel (a) shows the (mχ, σN
= 2 TeV. The black line is the
current upper limit from LUX [20], while the dashed red line is the sensitivity curve for LUX with 300 days of data, and the blue
dot-dashed curve will be probed by LZ-7. The green bands indicate the uncertainty in the scattering cross section as a function of
the strangeness content of the nucleon as described in the text. Panel (b) shows the (mχ, m ˜s1) plane, assuming the minimal reference
value BN
s = 0.5. The grey region (between the solid line and squark LSP line) is ruled out by current LUX data, while the red region
(between the solid and dashed lines) could be probed by LUX with 300 days of data, and the blue region (between the dashed and
dot-dashed lines) will be probed by LZ-7.

SI) plane for m ˜s1

REFERENCES

[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]

P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], Astron. Astrophys. 571, A16 (2014).
S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 716, 30 (2012) G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration],
Phys. Lett. B 716, 1 (2012)
K. Fukushima, C. Kelso, J. Kumar, P. Sandick and T. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. D 90, no. 9, 095007 (2014).
C. Kelso, J. Kumar, P. Sandick and P. Stengel, Phys. Rev. D 91, 055028 (2015).
J. Beringer et al. [Particle Data Group Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 86, 010001 (2012).
G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], JHEP 1405, 071 (2014).
L. Bergstrom, T. Bringmann, I. Cholis, D. Hooper and C. Weniger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 171101 (2013).
M. Ackermann et al. [Fermi-LAT Collaboration], arXiv:1503.02641 [astro-ph.HE].
G. W. Bennett et al. [Muon (g-2) Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 80, 052008 (2009).
M. J. Booth, hep-ph/9301293.
M. Srednicki, R. Watkins and K. A. Olive, Nucl. Phys. B 310, 693 (1988).
K. Cheung, O. C. W. Kong and J. S. Lee, JHEP 0906, 020 (2009).
J. Beringer et al.
http://pdg.lbl.gov/2013/reviews/rpp2013-rev-g-2-muon-anom-mag-moment.pdf.
A. Pierce, N. R. Shah and K. Freese, arXiv:1309.7351 [hep-ph].
G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], JHEP 1409, 176 (2014).
R. Mahbubani, M. Papucci, G. Perez, J. T. Ruderman and A. Weiler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, no. 15, 151804
(2013).
See, for example, M. Drees and M. Nojiri, Phys. Rev. D 48, 3483 (1993).
J. M. Alarcon, J. Martin Camalich and J. A. Oller, Phys. Rev. D 85, 051503 (2012).
G. Belanger, F. Boudjema, A. Pukhov and A. Semenov, Comput. Phys. Commun. 185, 960 (2014).
D. S. Akerib et al. [LUX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, no. 9, 091303 (2014).
P. Cushman, C. Galbiati, D. N. McKinsey, H. Robertson, T. M. P. Tait, D. Bauer, A. Borgland and B. Cabrera
et al., arXiv:1310.8327 [hep-ex].
CMS Collaboration, CMS-NOTE-2012-006.

[Particle Data Group Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 86, 010001 (2012);

10110210310-1210-1010-810-6mc@GeVDsSI@pbDsquarkLSP01234560123456mc@TeVDmsé1@TeVD