6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2
 
 
]

.

D
C
n
i
l
n
[
 
 

1
v
8
8
3
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Disentangling regular and chaotic motion in the standard map using
complex network analysis of recurrences in phase space

Yong Zou,1 Reik V. Donner,2 Marco Thiel,3 and J¨urgen Kurths2, 3, 4, 5
1)Department of Physics, East China Normal University, 200062 Shanghai, China
2)Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, P. O. Box 60 12 03, 14412 Potsdam, Germany
3)Institute for Complex Systems and Mathematical Biology, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB243UE,
United Kingdom
4)Department of Physics, Humboldt University Berlin, Newtonstraße 15, 12489 Berlin,
Germany
5)Department of Control Theory, Nizhny Novgorod State University, Gagarin Avenue 23, 606950 Nizhny Novgorod,
Russia

(Dated: 22 March 2016)

Recurrence in the phase space of complex systems is a well-studied phenomenon, which has provided deep insights into
the nonlinear dynamics of such systems. For dissipative systems, characteristics based on recurrence plots have recently
attracted much interest for discriminating qualitatively different types of dynamics in terms of measures of complexity,
dynamical invariants, or even structural characteristics of the underlying attractor’s geometry in phase space. Here, we
demonstrate that the latter approach also provides a corresponding distinction between different co-existing dynamical
regimes of the standard map, a paradigmatic example of a low-dimensional conservative system. Speciﬁcally, we show
that the recently developed approach of recurrence network analysis provides potentially useful geometric character-
istics distinguishing between regular and chaotic orbits. We ﬁnd that chaotic orbits in an intermittent laminar phase
(commonly referred to as sticky orbits) have a distinct geometric structure possibly differing in a subtle way from those
of regular orbits, which is highlighted by different recurrence network properties obtained from relatively short time
series. Thus, this approach can help discriminating regular orbits from laminar phases of chaotic ones, which presents
a persistent challenge to many existing chaos detection techniques.

PACS numbers: 89.75.Fb, 05.45.Ac, 05.45.Tp

In recent years, complex network theory has provided
many conceptual insights based on recurrence character-
istics of time series from various ﬁelds, which is referred to
as recurrence network analysis. While recent applications
of this novel concept have been restricted almost exclu-
sively to dissipative dynamics (i.e., the quantitative charac-
terization of attractors), we demonstrate in this work that
some of the characteristic features of recurrence networks
are useful for disentangling the complex dynamics of low-
dimensional conservative systems as well. In the standard
map, a typical chaotic orbit can be temporarily trapped
in the vicinity of the regular domains in phase space, re-
sulting in a possibly rather long time necessary to homo-
geneously ﬁll the chaotic domain – a phenomenon known
as stickiness. The presence of sticky orbits (i.e., intermit-
tent laminar phases of chaotic trajectories) presents an on-
going challenge to numerically characterizing the associ-
ated phase portraits. In this work, we demonstrate that in
the standard map, the geometric organization of regular
orbits as well as sticky versus ﬁlling parts of chaotic or-
bits in phase space can be successfully discriminated based
on relatively short time series by using several recurrence
network measures, including network transitivity, global
clustering coefﬁcient and average path length. This result
provides the ﬁrst documented ﬁnding pointing to the rele-
vance of recurrence network analysis for studying conser-
vative dynamical systems.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The importance of Poincar´e’s recurrences in dynamical sys-
tems has been widely recognized 1. In the last decades, con-
siderable theoretical progress has been made regarding the dy-
namical characteristics of various types of complex systems.
One particularly important achievement has been the intro-
duction of a rather simple visualization technique for recur-
rences in phase space, the recurrence plot2,3, which reduces
the fundamental complexity of studying recurrences to a bi-
nary matrix representation. This conceptually simple math-
ematical form allows drawing upon analogies to basic con-
cepts of nonlinear time series analysis4,5, information theory
(statistics on binary sequences providing measures of dynam-
ical disorder and complexity)6,7 or, more recently, complex
network theory8–10. These analogies have opened important
research avenues for using different types of statistics based
on recurrences, which are nowadays widely applied to time se-
ries from various ﬁelds. While most recent studies have been
restricted to dissipative dynamics (i.e., the quantitative char-
acterization of attractors), we demonstrate in this work that
some of the characteristic features of recurrence networks are
useful for studying conservative systems as well.

The phase space of many non-integrable Hamiltonian sys-
tems is composed of intermingled regions of regular and irreg-
ular orbits14. The regular domain comprises the state vectors
on both periodic and quasi-periodic trajectories, while the ir-
regular one contains the states forming chaotic orbits. Here,
a typical chaotic trajectory needs a certain time to homoge-

neously ﬁll its corresponding domain in phase space. How-
ever, once a chaotic orbit gets close to a stable periodic island
(i.e., the regular domain), it can be trapped in the vicinity of
this domain and, hence, appear almost regular in its motion for
a substantial amount of time. After this intermittent laminar
phase, the orbit escapes again to the rest of the chaotic domain,
eventually describing chaotic bursts across the termination of
this phase. Such an intermittent, possibly long-term conﬁne-
ment of the trajectory close to the regular domain is com-
monly referred to as stickiness11,13 and has been accepted as a
fundamental property of many Hamiltonian systems. Among
other possible scenarios15, the existence of (regular) islands-
around-islands embedded in the chaotic domain is one of the
mechanisms that is able to generate stickiness13,16. As a par-
ticularly relevant consequence, stickiness has been demon-
strated to result in anomalous transport phenomena in the
phase space of Hamiltonian systems.

The most traditional way of discriminating qualitatively
different types of dynamics is computing or numerically es-
timating the largest Lyapunov exponent λ17. Chaotic motion
is characterized by positive λ (in the case of conservative sys-
tems, the sum of all exponents is zero). Regular orbits, on
the other hand, have zero Lyapunov exponents. In practice,
ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponents are commonly used when re-
sorting to numerical calculations. In such cases, considerable
attention has to be paid to the convergence rate of the em-
ployed method, since the proper estimation of λ becomes ex-
tremely challenging if the observed orbit encounters a sticky
phase or exhibits another type of intermittent behavior15,18.
Recent work19 has proposed circumventing the correspond-
ing problems by considering sticky and ﬁlling chaotic phases
separately. This distinction can be useful for chaotic orbits
that have a long sticking time20 and shall also be employed
throughout the remainder of this manuscript.

Beyond the concept of Lyapunov exponents, there is a vast
body of methods for detecting chaos from time series14. Most
of these approaches make use of the transverse stability of
regular orbits in contrast to the exponential divergence of ini-
tially close trajectories in the case of chaos, thereby providing
heuristic simpliﬁcations of the classical Lyapunov exponent
concept. As a potential alternative, in this work we further
explore the potentials of recurrence plot-based methods (in
particular, recurrence network analysis) for obtaining a dis-
crimination between regular and chaotic trajectories from rel-
atively short time series – a problem where other chaos indica-
tors commonly experience difﬁculties. Corresponding studies
for dissipative systems have already demonstrated the great
potentials of such approaches, but have not yet been system-
atically extended to conservative dynamics. However, the un-
derlying concept of recurrences in phase space is well-deﬁned
in both types of systems, so that it appears natural to apply
corresponding methods to conservative systems as well. This
work is intended to ﬁll this gap.

As a paradigmatic example of an autonomous nearly-
integrable system with two degrees of freedom, we restrict

2

our attention to the standard map

yn+1 = yn +

κ
2π

sin(2πxn),

xn+1 = xn + yn+1,

mod 1

(1)

with κ denoting the system’s single control parameter, and
vn = (xn, yn) being the state vector of the system at its n-
th iteration. This model is probably the best-studied chaotic
Hamiltonian map and can be interpreted as a Poincar´e section
of a periodically kicked rotor12,13.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion II brieﬂy reviews some of the mathematical concepts of
recurrence analysis, comprising different approaches that ad-
dress either dynamical (R´enyi entropy of second order K2,
mean recurrence time hRT i) or geometric characteristics (re-
currence network properties). A more detailed description of
all methods is provided as an Appendix. The results obtained
when applying the different methods to example trajectories
of the standard map are discussed in Section III, providing
some particularly interesting ﬁndings based on the recurrence
network approach. We use this information for discussing
the corresponding potentials to discriminate between initial
conditions yielding regular and chaotic orbits of the standard
map, focusing on the problem of identifying and characteriz-
ing chaotic orbits in their sticky phase.

II. METHODS

Recurrence is a fundamental property of dynamical sys-
tems. In general, it can be conveniently analyzed by means
of recurrence plots (RPs)3 originally introduced in the seminal
work of Eckmann et al.2 This tool provides a two-dimensional
intuitive visualization of the underlying temporal recurrence
patterns even for high-dimensional systems. For this pur-
pose, one deﬁnes the recurrence matrix (RM) Ri,j as a binary
representation of whether or not pairs of observed state vec-
tors on the same trajectory are mutually close in phase space.
Given two state vectors vi and vj (where i and j denote time
indices), this proximity is most commonly characterized by
comparing the length of the difference vector between vi and
vj to a prescribed maximum distance ε, i.e.,

Ri,j(ε) = Θ(ε − kvi − vj k),

(2)

where Θ(·) is the Heaviside function and k · k a suitable norm.
In this work, we use the maximum norm for deﬁning distances
between state vectors in phase space. The properties of RPs
have been intensively studied for different kinds of dynamics3,
including periodic, quasi-periodic21,22, chaotic, and stochastic
dynamics3.

The crucial parameter for the calculation of the RM is the
recurrence threshold ε. There are several rules-of-thumb to
select a proper value of ε.
In many applications of RPs to
time series from various ﬁelds, it was found that the recur-
rence patterns do not change qualitatively for a large range
of ε, allowing for a reliable statistical analysis. Furthermore,
when comparing different time series (or trajectories), there

are two ways to set ε: (i) as a ﬁxed value for all time series,
yielding possibly different values of the recurrence rate

RR =

2

N (N − 1) X

i>j

Ri,j(ε),

(3)

i.e., the density of non-zero entries in the RM, for different se-
ries; and (ii) as a (variable) threshold value corresponding to a
ﬁxed (desired) RR. Note that the method (ii) generally makes
it easier to quantitatively compare the recurrence structures of
different time series, since some of the characteristic statisti-
cal quantities based on the RM change systematically with an
increasing RR. In this work, we will revisit the difference be-
tween both approaches for choosing ε for a low-dimensional
area-preserving map (Eq. (1)).

There is a multiplicity of approaches allowing to character-
ize the dynamics of a system under study based on its RM.
First, it has been shown that, among other features, the length
of diagonal and vertical structures in RPs can be used for
deﬁning a variety of complexity measures, which character-
ize properties such as the degree of determinism or laminar-
ity of the system6,23. The resulting recurrence quantiﬁcation
analysis (RQA) has been widely applied for studying phe-
nomena from various scientiﬁc disciplines3. As demonstrated
earlier22, RQA measures are able to characterize the sticki-
ness property of chaotic orbits in Hamiltonian systems like
the standard map. Therefore, in the present work, we do not
include any further discussion of RQA measures to avoid rep-
etitions.

A second approach to use recurrence properties for a quan-
titative characterization of the system’s dynamics makes use
of the fact that several dynamical invariants, such as the R´enyi
entropy of second order K2 and the correlation dimension D2,
can be reliably estimated from the RM4,5,24. Speciﬁcally, K2
measures the average rate at which information on previous
states is lost during the system’s evolution. The inverse of the
entropy value thus provides a rough estimate of the time for
which a reasonable prediction is possible. Accordingly, for
a sequence of independent and identically distributed random
numbers (white noise), K2 tends to inﬁnity, periodic dynam-
ics is characterized by K2 = 0, and chaotic systems yield a
positive yet ﬁnite K2, as they belong to a category between
regular deterministic and stochastic systems in terms of their
predictability. A quasi-periodic system shows non-trivial re-
currences but low complexity12, which yields K2 ≈ 0. Hence,
K2 is an appropriate measure to distinguish qualitatively dif-
ferent behaviors of the system. For the examples considered
in this paper, we use trajectories of N = 1, 000 to 5, 000 data
points to estimate K2 for each orbit, applying the algorithm
proposed by Thiel et al.5.

A third way to characterize the recurrence properties is
statistically evaluating the distribution of recurrence times
(RTs), which has been applied to both chaotic and stochastic
systems16,25. Recurrence times refer to the time intervals after
which a trajectory enters the ε-neighborhood of a previously
visited point in phase space and are conveniently described by
their empirical probability distribution p(τ ). Note that p(τ )
contains important information about the dynamics of the sys-
tem, which can be used for detecting subtle dynamical transi-

3

tions of the system under study as some characteristic param-
eter is varied. A periodic process shows a trivial RT distribu-
tion that yields a delta-peaked p(τ ) positioned at the system’s
period. A quasi-periodic process involving two incommensu-
rate frequencies (equivalent to a linear rotation on a unit circle
with an irrational frequency) displays three unique recurrence
times, resulting in p(τ ) being delta-peaked at the three corre-
sponding periods. Here, the largest characteristic RT is simply
the sum of the other two according to Slater’s theorem26. This
theorem has been demonstrated to provide a useful and fast
tool for determining the presence of quasi-periodicity21,22,27.
Moreover, RT statistics have great potentials for estimating
dynamical invariants (such as the information dimension D1
and the Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy28) and for studying ex-
treme events25. In turn, the recurrence of extreme events in
dynamical systems has been recently discussed in terms of
generalized extreme value theory to deﬁne a dynamical sta-
bility indicator for Hamiltonian maps29, an approach that is
conceptually related to the focus of this study, but shall not
be further discussed here. An empirical estimation of p(τ )
from the RM is based on the same concept as other recurrence
time statistics utilized elsewhere in the literature16,30, with a
slightly different averaging over all available state vectors vi
involved (see the Appendix for details). The mean recurrence
time is calculated straightforwardly as hRT i = R ∞
0 τ p(τ )dτ.
Finally, following a more recent approach, the RM (Eq. 2)
can be re-interpreted as the adjacency matrix of a complex
network, the ε-recurrence network (RN). In this context, each
state vector vi used in the computation of the RM is inter-
preted as a node of a complex network embedded in the phase
space of the dynamical system under study. The quantitative
analysis of RNs allows identifying transitions between dif-
ferent types of dynamics in a very precise way8,10,31,32.
In
this paper we consider three network measures that have al-
ready been shown to distinguish between qualitatively differ-
ent types of behavior in both discrete and continuous-time dis-
sipative systems8,31,33,34: global clustering coefﬁcient C, net-
work transitivity T , and average path length L (see the Ap-
pendix for details). Given the invariant density ρ(x) of the
system under study, the value of T can be analytically com-
puted35 and interpreted as a generalized fractal dimension32.
Speciﬁcally, high values of T indicate the presence of a lower-
dimensional structure in phase space commonly correspond-
ing to more regular dynamics. In contrast, the average path
length behaves differently for different types of dissipative
dynamical systems8,9,31: for maps, more regular dynamics is
characterized by lower values of L, whereas the opposite ap-
plies to continuous-time systems such as dissipative chaotic
oscillators.

Aspect Measures

dynamic K2, hRT i
geometric T , C, L

TABLE I. All measures based on the RM used in this study. In ad-
dition, we consider numerical estimates of the largest Lyapunov ex-
ponent λ obtained from considerably longer trajectory segments (see
text) as benchmarks.

Table I summarizes all measures that will be used in the fol-
lowing. We note that the Lyapunov exponent λ, K2 and the
RT distribution characterize time series from a dynamic per-
spective, whereas recurrence network analysis discloses the
properties of complex systems from a geometric viewpoint.
Certainly, the topological features of RNs are closely related
to dynamical characteristics of the underlying system9,32.

A

1.5

λ

1

0.5

0
103

4

B

0.6

2

K

0.4

0.2

104

T

105

106

0
103

104

T

105

106

III. RESULTS

A. Example trajectories: quasi-periodic, sticky and
ﬁlling chaotic orbits

We follow the approach of Kandrup et al.19 and categorize
the trajectories of the standard map (Eq. 1) into quasi-periodic,
sticky and ﬁlling (strongly) chaotic orbits. Note that stickiness
is a generic property of Hamiltonian chaos12 when t → ∞.
However, the concept of a sticky orbit only refers to the par-
ticular time-scale during which it is stuck (i.e., an intermittent
laminar phase of the chaotic orbit’s evolution). In this section,
we use RN and RT characteristics to investigate whether or
not it is possible to distinguish between quasi-periodic orbits
and the sticky (laminar) phases of chaotic orbits from rela-
tively short trajectory segments. Regarding other measures of
RQA, we refer to our previous work22.

To illustrate our approach, we ﬁrst consider three typical
segments of orbits of the standard map20, one of which shows
the stickiness property clearly.
In Fig. 1A, numerical esti-
mates of λ are shown for these three example segments. Here,
the initially sticky chaotic trajectory segment escapes from the
vicinity of the regular domain after approximately 1.65 × 105
iterations. We call this the escape time Tesc, which is about
two orders of magnitude larger than the common “observa-
tion” period in many time series analysis applications (103
to 104 time steps). For better comparison, we also choose a
quasi-periodic orbit together with a ﬁlling part of a chaotic
one. We note that with the number of iterations being much
smaller than Tesc, it is not possible to distinguish the quasi-
periodic orbit from the sticky part of the chaotic trajectory
based on numerical estimates of λ. Furthermore, the entropy
K2 also reveals rather little difference between the sticky seg-
ment and the quasi-periodic orbit if the number of iterations
does not reach Tesc (cf.
the red and green lines in Fig. 1B).
These results demonstrate that it is necessary to look at other
properties that allow for a corresponding discrimination al-
ready from time series that are considerably shorter than Tesc.
Figure 2 shows the behavior of the three RN-based mea-
sures T , C, and L, together with the mean recurrence times
hRT i for the three considered trajectory segments, respec-
tively. In all computations, we have used RR = 0.02, max-
imum norm and sliding windows with N = 1, 000 subse-
quent state vectors taken from the respective orbits. We note
that a careful statistical analysis of the probability distribution
functions of all four considered measures for different types
of dynamics would be required for evaluating whether or not
statistically signiﬁcant deviations exist among different types
of trajectories. However, such a detailed analysis is beyond

FIG. 1. (color online) (A) Largest Lyapunov exponent λ for three se-
lected orbits (κ = 5 in Eq. 1) in dependence on the considered num-
ber of iterations. The different lines represent quasi-periodic (green),
sticky (red), and ﬁlling chaotic (black) orbits. (B) R´enyi entropy K2
computed for non-overlapping windows sliding along the trajectories
(window length N = 1, 000).

the scope of the present work. To this end, we emphasize
that by visual inspection, one can clearly recognize that all
four measures reveal distinctive differences between the con-
sidered quasi-periodic and ﬁlling chaotic orbit segments. In
contrast, the sticky example orbit exhibits some distinct and
quite complex behavior during different time intervals. In the
latter case, the values of all considered measures quickly con-
verge towards those of the ﬁlling chaotic orbit after the termi-
nation of the sticky phase, i.e., after the trajectory has escaped
from the vicinity of the regular domain in phase space. How-
ever, a more detailed inspection reveals that based upon the
RN characteristics we can distinguish three different stages:
T < Tdec, Tdec < T < Tesc and T > Tesc. We will dis-
cuss the meaning of Tdec (≈ 4 × 103) below in some detail.
The ﬁrst two stages both correspond to the sticky phase of the
orbit and can only be distinguished from each other by the ob-
served values of L, whereas the third one corresponds to the
post-escape phase. The latter part of the trajectory comprises
a phase of bursting behavior characterized by huge variations
of all considered characteristics, which is followed by a more
homogeneously ﬁlling chaotic phase interrupted by just a few
short bursting intervals possibly indicating further short peri-
ods of intermittent dynamics.

In the post-escape phase (T > Tesc), the chaotic orbit has
left the vicinity of the regular domain (i.e., its intermittent
laminar phase) and ﬁlls the chaotic domain of the phase space
in essentially the same way as the initially ﬁlling chaotic tra-
jectory segment. Strong ﬂuctuations of the considered recur-
rence characteristics in the ﬁrst part of this phase indicate the
presence of chaotic bursts where the geometric structure of
the orbit observed for short periods of time does not yet cor-
respond to that of the homogeneously ﬁlling chaotic dynam-
ics, but exhibits a strong variability. In turn, in the homoge-
neously ﬁlling chaotic regime, previous results for dissipative
maps suggest that the three RN characteristics T , C and L
should consistently show much larger values for the regular
(quasi-periodic) than for the chaotic orbits (with the excep-
tion of intermittent bursts possibly representing short periods
of stickiness), which is conﬁrmed by our numerical results.

We emphasize that intermittent bursts with strongly ﬂuc-
tuating RN and RT characteristics as observed in Fig. 2 are
characteristic for chaotic trajectory segments and cannot be

A

1

0.8

T

0.6

0.4

103
30

C

20

L

10

0
103

B

1

0.8

C

0.6

0.4

103

D

2.5

i
T
R
h
g
o
l

2

1.5

103

104

T

105

106

104

T

105

106

5

A

0.7

y

0.5

B

0.7

y

0.5

104

T

105

106

0.3

T=[1, 1000]
0.3

0.5
x

0.7

0.3

T=[6001, 7000]
0.3
0.5
x

0.7

FIG. 3. Phase portrait of the chaotic orbit in its sticky phase during
two different periods of iterations: (A) T = [1, 1000], (B) T =
[6001, 7000]. Inserts show a zoom of one part of the orbit, displaying
the different arrangements of the associated sets of state vectors in
phase space (different distribution of gaps between neighboring state
vectors).

104

T

105

106

FIG. 2.
(color online) Recurrence characteristics for the quasi-
periodic (green), sticky (red), and ﬁlling chaotic (black) orbits from
Fig. 1 computed for sliding windows (N = 1, 000) over the different
time series: (A) RN transitivity T ; (B) global clustering coefﬁcient
C; (C) average path length L; (D) logarithm of the mean recurrence
time hRT i.

observed in the case of quasi-periodic dynamics. Hence, the
presence of abrupt changes in the recurrence characteristics
could serve as a criterion for identifying chaos. Notably,
the latter viewpoint is not helpful when experiencing a sticky
phase – or another type of intermittent behavior – during the
entire period of available observations. However, the proba-
bility to encounter such a situation when choosing the initial
conditions at random decreases systematically as the length of
the studied trajectory segment increases.

Considering the laminar phase (T < Tesc), we ﬁnd that all
four characteristics show different values than for the regular
(quasi-periodic) one. Notably, T , C and hRT i are substan-
tially larger during the sticky phase of the chaotic trajectory
in comparison with the regular orbit, while the corresponding
difference is most clearly visible in the two RN characteris-
tics (Fig. 2D). At ﬁrst, this result is surprising, since T and
C have an interpretation as the global and spatially averaged
local (geometric) dimension of the trajectory, respectively32.
Hence, one could expect that the values of both measures are
smaller for a chaotic orbit (even in a sticky phase) than for
a quasi-periodic one. In turn, based upon numerical studies,
Tsiganis et al.36 argued that “the dimension of the phase space
subset on which a sticky segment is embedded does not dif-
fer from the dimension of the set on which a regular orbit
lies.” According to these results, at least the correlation di-
mension studied in the former work allows discriminating be-
tween sticky and ﬁlling chaotic phases, but not between sticky
chaotic segments and a quasi-periodic orbit.

In order to understand why we can actually observe a
marked difference between sticky segments and neighboring
quasi-periodic orbits, Fig. 3 highlights the geometry of the
set of state vectors forming the trajectory segment during the
sticky phase. We observe that as the orbits within the nearby
quasi-periodic domain, in its sticky phase the chaotic orbit
consists of two spatially separated parts, each of which dis-

plays two sharp kinks. For the dissipative chaotic H´enon map,
it was found that such structures can spuriously induce a lower
dimensionality of the system (for ﬁnite values of ε) due to the
existence of additional closed triangles in the RN in the parts
of the phase space where these kinks are located and, hence,
results in a positive bias of both T and C9,32.

Regarding the average path length L, Fig. 2 shows that the
RN is initially (T < Tdec) characterized by higher values for
the chaotic orbit in its laminar phase in comparison with the
quasi-periodic one, whereas L decays fastly around T = Tdec
and reaches values even below those found for the initially
ﬁlling chaotic orbit for T > Tdec. The reason for this marked
drop can also be identiﬁed from Fig. 3.
Initially, the orbit
appears more or less like a (discretely sampled) continuous
curve (i.e., spatially neighboring state vectors are always sep-
arated by distances less than ε). In turn, at T > Tdec distinct
subsets of state vectors spanning the orbit segment get sep-
arated by increasingly large phase space regions (larger than
ε) without state vectors. Hence, we refer to Tdec as the RN
decomposition time, which depends on the chosen value of
ε. Consequently, the initial RN consists of mainly two mutu-
ally disconnected network components corresponding to two
spatially separated parts of the regular domain in phase space
(Fig. 3A), but then decomposes further into a larger number of
mutually disconnected network components (which are mu-
tually separated by more than a distance ε in phase space)
at T > Tdec (cf.
the inset of Fig. 3B). Since the average
path length is commonly computed over all pairs of mutually
reachable nodes, it necessarily decreases if there is a transition
towards more components of smaller size.

The latter explanation is conﬁrmed by a sharp decrease in
the size of the RN’s giant component shown in Fig. 4B. We
emphasize that the number of RN components Nc would pro-
vide another suitable measure for tracing this transition. In
turn, in the given situation, the RN percolation threshold εc
is less suited for this purpose, since the regular domain close
to which the sticky orbit segment is located already consists
of two spatially separated parts (as seen from the size of the
largest RN component for the nearby quasi-periodic orbit ex-
hibiting G(n) ≤ 0.5). In contrast, the RN properties L and
G(n) unveil the mechanism how the laminar phase of the
chaotic orbit is terminated: the state vectors along the chaotic

A

0.1

ε

0.05

B

1

)
n
(
G

0.5

0
103

104

T

105

106

0
103

104

T

105

106

FIG. 4.
(A) Recurrence threshold ε and (B) size of the RN’s largest
component G(n) for sliding windows of N = 1, 000 points along
the three previously considered trajectory segments. Note that due to
the presence of two spatially separated parts of the orbits, the quasi-
periodic orbit (green) and the sticky phase of the chaotic orbit (red)
have G(n) ≤ 0.5, whereas the ﬁlling chaotic one (black) commonly
exhibits a single component (exceptions likely correspond to short
periods of stickiness or effects due to the ﬁnite sample size), i.e.,
G(n) = 1.

trajectory get more and more concentrated in phase space,
leading to the successive decomposition of the correspond-
ing RN structure into smaller, mutually disconnected subnet-
works when viewed at ﬁnite spatial resolution ε for ﬁnite time
windows far before the actual escape at T = Tesc. In this
spirit, the decomposition of the RN provides an early indi-
cation of the loss of the stickiness property of the observed
chaotic orbit. While the observations described above corre-
spond to purely empirical ﬁndings, an in-depth analysis of the
intermittent behavior of chaotic orbits of the standard map by
complementary techniques like ﬁrst-return maps would allow
relating the reorganization of chaotic orbit segments across
the escape from the sticky phase to the associated transport
properties. Obviously, along with the loss of stickiness the
vicinity of the invariant tori are visited more and more hetero-
geneously. The detailed examination of the dynamical roots
of this behavior (in the context of existing results on intermit-
tency in dynamical systems) will provide a potentially inter-
esting topic for further studies. The same applies to the pro-
cesses accompanying the trapping of a chaotic trajectory near
periodic islands.

Within the framework of the present work, it would be
a practically relevant question whether the observations de-
scribed above are also characteristic for sticky orbits in other
Hamiltonian systems. However, a detailed study of this as-
pect is beyond the scope of the present work. To this end, we
emphasize that systematically studying Tdec as a function of
ε could provide a tool for further quantitatively characterizing
this transition. However, it needs to be kept in mind that the
RN computed for running windows in time (i.e., consisting of
a ﬁxed number of nodes) needs to have a minimum number of
edges (minimum feasible RR35) in order to allow for a proper
evaluation, which sets a practical lower bound to ε.

Regarding the numerical results described above, it only re-
mains to be explained why the average path length L initially
shows larger values during the sticky phase of the chaotic tra-
jectory segment than for the quasi-periodic orbit. Given that
the recurrence threshold ε is almost the same for both orbits
during the full period of stickiness (cf. Fig. 4A), we relate this

6

to the fact that (unlike for dissipative maps previously studied
elsewhere9,32) both the regular (quasi-periodic) orbit and the
sticky phase of the chaotic one appear (up to the spatial reso-
lution ε) to correspond to subsets of state vectors that exhibit
no gaps larger than ε in phase space (i.e., there exist relatively
long paths in the RN connecting state vectors with a mutual
distance of less than ε). In such a case, the behavior of L is
mainly determined by the lengths of these paths, which can be
analytically computed if the probability distribution function
of the state vectors is known35. For the sticky phase of the
chaotic orbit, the corresponding state vectors form an outer
envelope of the quasi-periodic domain, so that the resulting
larger spatial dimensions imply somewhat larger L in the RN.
Summarizing the results obtained so far, all four character-
istics can potentially distinguish between quasi-periodic and
sticky chaotic motion.
In particular, for T and C (but to a
smaller extend also hRT i), the observed values are consis-
tent for the full period of stickiness and thus allow identifying
sticky orbit segments even from relatively short time series
(i.e., when the number of iterations is much lower than Tesc,
e.g., 103 − 104 iterations), because the geometric shapes of
both types of orbits differ markedly. However, the aforemen-
tioned measures over-compensate the relative tendency one
would actually expect for chaotic trajectories when compared
to quasi-periodic ones. The latter observation is due to the
stronger “kinkiness” of the sticky orbits. We will re-examine
this feature below in order to address the question whether
it can be exploited for automatically discriminating between
quasi-periodic and sticky chaotic trajectory segments.

B. Full phase space

Based on the results for the three example trajectories de-
scribed in Section III A, we now turn to a characterization of
the full phase space regarding different types of dynamics. For
this purpose, we start with 500 initial conditions distributed
randomly within the domain of deﬁnition of the standard map,
(x, y) ∈ [0, 1] × [0, 1]. Here, we use the canonical parame-
ter value of κ = 1.4 in Eq. 1. All trajectories are computed
for 5000 time steps. Note that for conservative dynamics we
do not have transients in the sense of dissipative dynamics
where an attractor needs to be approached ﬁrst. This is an
advantage in comparison to numerical studies of dissipative
systems. Hence, the state vectors at all iterations can be fur-
ther taken into account.

For the ease of comparison, Fig. 5A displays the phase
space of the standard map, where a sample of state vectors
of the system is colored according to the largest Lyapunov ex-
ponent λ of the orbit traversing each corresponding point in
phase space. As expected, we observe a signiﬁcant difference
between the chaotic domain with positive λ > 0 and the regu-
lar domain with λ ≈ 0. Note that for numerically approximat-
ing λ (but not the characteristics estimated from the RM), we
have used much longer trajectories with N = 2 × 105 points,
since the N = 5, 000 iterations considered in the following
for computing the recurrence-based characteristics are often
not sufﬁcient for obtaining stable estimates of λ.

7

FIG. 5.
(color online) Phase space of the standard map (Eq. (1))
characterized by (A) the largest Lyapunov exponent λ and (B) K2
estimated from the RM.

FIG. 6. (color online) Same phase space as in Fig. 5, but highlighting
the two different ways to choose the recurrence threshold ε. (A) RR
for a ﬁxed threshold ε = 0.03, (B) ε for a ﬁxed RR = 0.02.

The resulting pattern of K2 estimated from the RM is
shown in Fig. 5B. Regarding our “experimental” setting, we
emphasize that 5000 iterations often do not guarantee that all
sticky orbits can leave the vicinity of the quasi-periodic areas
in phase space and, hence, that a single chaotic trajectory seg-
ment can fully cover the chaotic domain. Therefore the con-
sidered trajectory length of N = 5, 000 state vectors seems to
be insufﬁcient to reliably estimate K2, since the scaling region
used for estimation37 can eventually get blurred by short diag-
onal lines. This relatively short time series length explains that
the numerical results of Fig. 5B do not show convincingly the
theoretical relationship that K2 is a lower bound of the sum of
positive Lyapunov exponents of the system17. However, our
ensemble of 500 random initial conditions is found to be suf-
ﬁcient to provide a rough map of the phase space (distinguish-
ing qualitatively different types of dynamics and highlighting
domains with temporary stickiness of chaotic orbits) as shown
below. Taken together, quasi-periodic orbits and chaotic tra-
jectories in their sticky phases cannot be reliably distinguished
by K2 in the considered analysis setting.

As discussed in detail in Section II, there are two main
strategies for selecting the threshold ε. While the estimation
of K2 (Fig. 5B) from the RM does not distinguish between
both approaches (since it uses a scaling relationship emerging
as ε is varied), the results for the other four characteristics de-
pend on whether ε or RR is ﬁxed. Figure 6 illustrates the mu-
tual dependence between ε and RR, thereby extending upon
earlier results for a single orbit previously reported for dissipa-
tive chaotic systems38. Note that for Hamiltonian systems, do-
mains covered by periodic, quasi-periodic and chaotic orbits
can have intrinsically different sizes, hence, distances along

FIG. 7.
(color online) Same phase space as in Fig. 5, but char-
acterized by recurrence statistics for the standard map using ﬁxed
RR = 0.02. (A) T , (B) C, (C) L, and (D) hRT i.

FIG. 8.
ε = 0.03.

(color online) Same phase space as in Fig. 7 for a ﬁxed

such orbits are commonly not comparable. Hence, using the
same ε can lead to very different RR (Fig. 6B).

When aiming for a quantitative comparability of RN char-
acteristics (which can depend on RR), we suggest to adap-
tively choose ε such that the RR has the same ﬁxed value
(Fig. 6B). In turn, since regular and (even sticky) chaotic or-
bits can have considerably different spatial dimensions, it is
of potential interest to also consider a setting with ε being
globally ﬁxed (see Fig. 6A for the resulting behavior of RR).
The corresponding results for the three RN measures as well
as hRT i for both settings are shown in Figs. 7 and 8, respec-
tively.

The overall structure of the phase space with its intermin-
gled regular and chaotic orbits is captured by both dynamic
(K2 and RT ) and geometric measures (e.g., T and other RN
characteristics), as shown in Figs. 7 and 8. Speciﬁcally, quasi-

8

of a classiﬁcation obtained by the approach presented above
in a more rigorous statistical framework with the help of the
largest Lyapunov exponent λ. However, such an assessment
of the discriminatory power of different measures becomes
both numerically and conceptually more challenging than for
the problem of distinguishing periodic and chaotic orbits in
the parameter space of dissipative nonlinear oscillators as pre-
viously studied31 for different reasons: (i) there are periodic,
quasi-periodic and chaotic trajectories (i.e., three qualitatively
different types of orbits) intermingled in phase space; (ii) there
is no unique residence time scale for chaotic orbits to stay in
an intermittent laminar phase corresponding to stickiness; and
(iii) technically, the assessment is more appropriate for inves-
tigating the parameter space of complex systems31 than for
exploring the phase space with coexisting domains of quali-
tatively different dynamics as done as in Figs. 7 and 8. The
statistical analysis would hence yield results that are speciﬁc
to the particular choices of the length of time series and initial
conditions.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a numerical case study demonstrating
that recurrence-based methods in general, and recurrence net-
works in particular, can be useful for disentangling different
dynamical regimes not only in dissipative, but also in conser-
vative dynamical systems. Speciﬁcally, we have shown that
the geometric properties of regular (i.e., periodic and quasi-
periodic) orbits of the standard map as captured by recur-
rence networks clearly differ from such of (ﬁlling) segments
of chaotic orbits that do not exhibit intermittent periods of
stickiness close to the domain of regular solutions. While
in the latter case, many existing approaches can fail to un-
ambiguously discriminate between quasi-periodic and sticky
chaotic dynamics, recurrence network characteristics provide
indicators for the presence of chaos even in such rather com-
plex situations. The transition phase between laminar (sticky)
and homogeneously ﬁlling chaotic dynamics has not been ex-
plicitly studied, but presents an interesting subject to be fur-
ther investigated. In general, one has to note that sticky and
ﬁlling chaotic dynamics can correspond to different phases
of the same chaotic orbit (the durations of which can show a
considerably wide distribution). Thus, making a distinction
between both appearances is only reasonable for speciﬁed pe-
riods of observation of the system under study.

It is important to emphasize that the proposed application
of recurrence network analysis to conservative systems has
been successful already for relatively short trajectory seg-
ments (e.g., N = 1, 000 or 5, 000 points). Although this
study has considered only the paradigmatic and best-studied
example of a discrete-time two-dimensional Hamiltonian sys-
tem exhibiting co-existence between regular orbits and chaos
(the Chirikov standard map), it is expected that similar results
can be obtained for other Hamiltonian maps with a chaotic
regime, such as a four-dimensional version of the standard
map consisting of two coupled classical standard maps39, Za-
slavsky’s stochastic web map40, Meiss’ quadratic map41, or

FIG. 9. (color online) Zoom into Fig. 7A displaying the values of T
at the interface between regular and chaotic domains. Black arrows
indicate chaotic areas with increased transitivity values.

periodic trajectories are characterized by larger values of net-
work transitivity T , while ﬁlling chaotic ones have smaller
T . The same applies to C. Regarding both properties, the ob-
tained picture is consistent for the two settings with ﬁxed RR
and ﬁxed ε, respectively. For hRT i, the pattern is only conclu-
sive for ﬁxed ε, where the mean recurrence times are consid-
erably larger in the ﬁlling chaotic case than for regular orbits
(as it is the case for the RN average path length L), which is
expected since the chaotic domain is larger than the regular
one. Speciﬁcally, while a chaotic orbit can ﬁll the complete
domain (as t → ∞), regular ones are distinct and mutually
nested, which results in different values of hRT i and L for
the latter which (for ﬁxed ε) depend clearly on the size of the
orbit. In turn, when ﬁxing RR the effect of different spatial
distances on the estimated recurrence times and RN average
path lengths is essentially removed (Fig. 7C,D).

Turning back to the original question of whether or not it
is possible to distinguish chaotic trajectories in their sticky
phase from quasi-periodic orbits, our results indicate that in
agreement with the ﬁndings for the three example trajecto-
ries in Section III.A, the RN transitivity T obtained with a
ﬁxed RR is a promising candidate measure. Notably, the
sticky chaotic orbit segments are organized in phase space
like envelopes of the islands-around-islands (i.e., a period-
n orbit surrounded by islands of high periods). As Fig. 9
indicates, these envelopes are in fact characterized by ele-
vated values of T clearly above those found for the orbits
within the regular domains (T = 0.75 – as expected for one-
dimensional curves32 — in the middle of these domains and
T ≈ 0.8 inside the quasi-periodic island chains), while many
initial conditions close to the quasi-periodic orbits (but not be-
longing to them) lead to ﬁnite-time trajectory segments with
T ∼ 0.85 . . . 0.9 and even above due to the kinky geometry
shown in Fig. 3, which is consistent with previous ﬁndings for
dissipative maps9,32.

Following the ideas presented in our previous work on dis-
sipative systems31, one could in principle assess the quality

even continuous-time Hamiltonian system like the H´enon-
Heiles system21,42. A continuation of this study taking such
different systems into account will be subject of our future
work.

The aim of the present study was to initially explore the
general potentials of recurrence network analysis for ap-
plications to conservative systems. We did neither under-
take an exhaustive quantitative comparison between different
recurrence-based techniques, nor between recurrence-based
approaches and classical chaos indicators based on the idea
of exponential transverse motion in phase space14,43 or estab-
lished tests for the presence of chaos like the 0-1 test55. How-
ever, a corresponding in-depth investigation should be a sub-
ject of future research as well, including a systematic study of
the effects of the available time series length on the obtained
estimates.

In order to further support the applicability of the pro-
posed approach, a detailed performance assessment of differ-
ent methods would be desirable. For such an assessment, two
criteria appear of special relevance:

On the one hand, the classiﬁcation accuracy needs to be ad-
dressed. Notably, a corresponding investigation would require
considerable numerical efforts, since the exact location of the
chaotic domains cannot be computed analytically for the stan-
dard map, but needs to be evaluated by some benchmark tech-
nique. For this purpose, the standard reference would again be
the largest Lyapunov exponent, the appropriate estimation of
which, however, is considerably challenged by the presence of
stickiness at all possible time scales (i.e., the closer an initial
condition is to the boundary of the regular domain, the longer
the sticking time can be expected to be). In fact, this problem
affects essentially all existing classiﬁcation criteria for orbits
in Hamiltonian systems exhibiting stickiness phenomena.

On the other hand, convergence time should be taken into
account as a second criterion, which is of particular rele-
vance in situations where only relatively short time series are
available for characterizing the nature of different orbits. Re-
garding the latter aspect, we emphasize that recurrence meth-
ods present a powerful methodological alternative to indica-
tors based on transverse expansion. From the computational
perspective, recurrence plot-based methods are conceptually
simple and have reasonable computational demands, making
them excellent candidates for applications to short experimen-
tal time series3.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

YZ acknowledges ﬁnancial support by the National Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 11305062,
11135001, 81471651), the Specialized Research Fund (SRF)
for the Doctoral Program (20130076120003), and the SRF for
ROCS, SEM. RVD has been supported by the Federal Min-
istry for Education and Research (BMBF) via the young in-
vestigators group CoSy-CC2 (project no. 01LN1306A).

9

Appendix A: Methodological details

In this Appendix, we provide algorithmic details on the set
of complementary recurrence analysis approaches used in this
paper.

1. Dynamical invariant K2

We recall the techniques presented in Thiel et al. 5,24 to es-
timate K2 from the RM (Eq. 2) and present some remarks
on the corresponding computations. K2 can be estimated
from the cumulative distribution of diagonal lines P c
ε (l) in the
RP24. Speciﬁcally, the probability of ﬁnding a diagonal line
of at least length l in the RP of a chaotic map is given by

P c
ε (l) ∼ εD2 exp(−K2(ε)l).

(A1)

Therefore, if we represent P c

ε (l) in a logarithmic scale ver-
sus l, we should obtain a straight line with slope −K2(ε)
for large l. This slope is independent of ε for a determin-
istic chaotic system, while linearly dependent on ε for ran-
dom processes. Thus, K2 can be estimated from RPs pro-
vided the length of time series covers the underlying system
in the (sampled) phase space sufﬁciently well. This method
has been successfully applied to characterize ﬂuid dynamics
in different regimes5, to study the stability of extrasolar plan-
etary systems44, and to divide the parameter space of a me-
chanical oscillator system into different regimes45.

One important advantage of the RP-based estimator of K2
(Eq. A1) is that it is independent of the choice of the parame-
ters for a possibly necessary embedding, which can be impor-
tant when studying real-world observational time series.

2. Recurrence time statistics from RM

The detailed steps to estimate the RT distribution p(τ ) from

the RM are as follows:

RTs can be identiﬁed as the lengths of non-interrupted ver-
tical (or horizontal, since the RM is symmetric) “white lines”
that do not contain any recurrence (i.e., no pair of mutually
close state vectors). More precisely, such a white line of
length τ starts at the position (i, j) in the RP if24

Ri,j+m =

1
0
1

if m = −1,
for m ∈ {0, . . . , τ − 1},
if m = τ.

(A2)




This means that for all times k = j−1, . . . , j+τ, the observed
state vectors vk are compared with vi. The structure given by
Eq. (A2) can be interpreted as follows: At time k = j − 1,
the trajectory falls into an ε-neighborhood of vi. Then, for
k = j, . . . , j + τ − 1, it moves further away from vi than a
distance ε, until it returns to the ε-neighborhood of vi again
at k = j + τ. Hence, given a uniform sampling of the tra-
jectory in the time domain, the length τ of the resulting white
line in the corresponding RP is proportional to the time that

the trajectory needs to return ε-close to vi. Going beyond the
concept of ﬁrst-return times, the ensemble of all recurrences
to the ε-neighborhood of vi induces a RT distribution for this
speciﬁc point. Combining this information for all available
points vi in a given time series (i.e., considering the lengths
of all white lines in the RP), one obtains the RT distribution
p(τ ) associated with the observed (sampled) trajectory seg-
ment in phase space. Hence, the length distribution p(l) of
white vertical lines l in the RM not containing any recurrent
pair of observed state vectors provides an empirical estimate
of the distribution of RTs on the considered orbit.

3. Recurrence network analysis

Recently,

the idea of transforming a time series into
complex network representations has emerged in the sci-
entiﬁc literature, providing new alternatives for studying
basic properties of time series from a complex network
perspective8–10,46–48. Among other corresponding approaches,
the RM (Eq. 2) can be re-interpreted as the adjacency matrix
of the so-called ε-recurrence network (RN).

In order to construct the RN, we re-consider the recurrence
matrix Ri,j, the main diagonal of which is removed for conve-
nience, as the adjacency matrix Ai,j of an undirected complex
network associated with the recorded trajectory, i.e.,

Ai,j = Ri,j(ε) − δi,j,

(A3)

where δi,j is the Kronecker delta. The nodes of this network
are given by the individual sampled state vectors on the tra-
jectory, whereas the connectivity is established according to
their mutual closeness in phase space. This deﬁnition provides
a generic way for analyzing phase space properties of com-
plex systems in terms of RN topology9,32. However, since this
topology is invariant under permutations of the order of nodes,
the statistical properties of RNs do not speciﬁcally capture the
system’s dynamics, but its geometric structure based on an
appropriate sampling. We emphasize that a single ﬁnite-time
trajectory does not necessarily represent the typical long-term
behavior of the underlying system. Hence, the resulting net-
work properties can depend – among others – on the length N
of the considered time series (i.e., the network size), the prob-
ability distribution of the data, embedding38, sampling10,49,
etc.

Although they primarily describe geometric aspects, the
topological features of RNs are closely related to dynamical
characteristics of the underlying system9,32.
In dissipative
chaotic model systems (e.g., R¨ossler and Lorenz systems),
both local and global network properties have already been
studied in great detail32.

In this paper, we consider the following three characteris-

tics50,51 as potential candidates for discriminatory statistics:

1. the average path length L, which quantiﬁes the average
geodesic (graph) distance li,j between all pairs of nodes
(i, j),

L = hli,ji =

2

N (N − 1) X

i<j

li,j,

(A4)

10

where li,j is the minimum number of edges separating
two nodes i and j;

2. the global clustering coefﬁcient C52, which gives the
arithmetic mean of the local clustering coefﬁcients Ci
(i.e., the fraction of nodes connected with a node i that
are pairwise connected themselves) taken over all i,

C =

1
N

N

X

i=1

Ci

with

Ci = Pj,k;i6=j6=k Ai,jAi,kAj,k
Pj,k;i6=j6=k Ai,j Ai,k

;

(A5)

(A6)

3. network transitivity T 53,54, which is closely related to C
(but gives less weight to poorly connected nodes32) and
globally characterizes the linkage relationships among
triples of nodes in a complex network (i.e., the proba-
bility of a third edge within a set of three nodes given
that the two other edges are already known to exist),

T =

3 N∆
N3

= Pi,j,k;i6=j6=k Ai,j Ai,kAj,k
Pi,j,k;i6=j6=k Ai,j Ai,k

,

(A7)

where N∆ is the number of triangles in the network and
N3 is the number of connected triples. Note that T is
sometimes referred to as the (Barrat-Weigt) global clus-
tering coefﬁcient, often also denoted as C, e.g., in ref.31.
In order to avoid confusion, in this work we prefer to
discuss both measures separately.

We emphasize that further network measures (e.g., local be-
tweenness centrality bv and global assortativity coefﬁcient R)
have also been shown to discriminate between different types
of dynamics in dissipative systems8,9,31, but are not considered
in this work for brevity.

1H. Poincar´e, “Sur la probl`eme des trois corps et les ´equations de la dy-
namique,” Acta Mathematica, 13, A3–A270 (1890).
2J.-P. Eckmann, S. O. Kamphorst, and D. Ruelle, “Recurrence plots of dy-
namical systems,” Europhys. Lett., 4, 973–977 (1987).
3N. Marwan, M. C. Romano, M. Thiel, and J. Kurths, “Recurrence plots for
the analysis of complex systems,” Phys. Rep., 438, 237–329 (2007).
4P. Faure and H. Korn, “A new method to estimate the Kolmogorov entropy
from recurrence plots: its application to neuronal signals,” Physica D, 122,
265–279 (1998).
5M. Thiel, M. Romano, P. Read, and J. Kurths, “Estimation of dynami-
cal invariants without embedding by recurrence plots,” Chaos, 14, 234–243
(2004).
6J. P. Zbilut and C. L. Webber Jr., “Embeddings and delays as derived from
quantiﬁcation of recurrence plots,” Physics Letters A, 171, 199–203 (1992).
7N. Marwan, N. Wessel, U. Meyerfeldt, A. Schirdewan, and J. Kurths, “Re-
currence plot based measures of complexity and its application to heart rate
variability data,” Phys. Rev. E, 66, 026702 (2002).
8N. Marwan, J. F. Donges, Y. Zou, R. V. Donner, and J. Kurths, “Complex
network approach for recurrence analysis of time series,” Phys. Lett. A,
373, 4246–4254 (2009).
9R. V. Donner, Y. Zou, J. F. Donges, N. Marwan, and J. Kurths, “Recurrence
networks – A novel paradigm for nonlinear time series analysis,” New J.
Phys., 12, 033025 (2010).

10R. V. Donner, M. Small, J. F. Donges, N. Marwan, Y. Zou, R. Xiang, and
J. Kurths, “Recurrence-based time series analysis by means of complex net-
work methods,” Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos, 21, 1019–1046 (2011).

11C. Karney, “Long-time correlations in the stochastic regime,” Physica D, 8,

360–380 (1983).

12A. Lichtenberg and M. Lieberman, Regular and Chaotic Dynamics, 2nd ed.

(Springer, Berlin, 1992).

13J. Meiss, “Symplectic maps, variational principles, and transport,” Rev.

Mod. Phys, 64, 795–848 (1992).

14T. C. Bountis and C. Skokos, Complex Hamiltonian Dynamics (Springer,

Berlin/Heidelberg, 2012).

15V. Afraimovich and G. Zaslavsky, “Sticky orbits of chaotic Hamiltonian dy-
namics,” in Chaos, Kinetics and Nonlinear Dynamics in Fluids and Plas-
mas, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 511, edited by S. Benkadda and G. Za-
slavsky (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998) pp. 59–82.

16G. Zaslavsky, “Chaos, fractional kinetics, and anomalous transport,” Phys.

Rep., 371, 461–580 (2002).

17E. Ott, Chaos in Dynamical Systems (Cambridge University Press, 1993).
18V. Afraimovich and G. M. Zaslavsky, “Spacetime complexity in Hamilto-

nian dynamics,” Chaos, 13, 519–532 (2003).

19H. Kandrup, C. Siopis, G. Contopoulos, and R. Dvorak, “Diffusion and
scaling in escapes from two degrees of freedom Hamiltonian systems,”
Chaos, 9, 381–392 (1999).

20G. Contopoulos, N. Voglis, and R. Dvorak, “Transition spectra of dynami-

cal systems,” Cel. Mech. Dyn. Astron., 67, 293–317 (1997).

21Y. Zou, D. Paz´o, M. Thiel, M. Romano, and J. Kurths, “Distinguishing
quasiperiodic dynamics from chaos in short-time series,” Phys. Rev. E, 76,
016210 (2007).

22Y. Zou, M. Thiel, M. Romano, and J. Kurths, “Characterization of sticki-

ness by means of recurrence,” Chaos, 17, 043101 (2007).

23L. L. Trulla, A. Giuliani, J. P. Zbilut, and C. L. Webber Jr., “Recurrence
quantiﬁcation analysis of the logistic equation with transients,” Physics Let-
ters A, 223, 255–260 (1996).

24M. Thiel, M. Romano, and J. Kurths, “Analytical description of recurrence
plots of white noise and chaotic processes,” Appl. Nonlin. Dyn., 11, 20–29
(2003).

25E. G. Altmann and H. Kantz, “Recurrence time analysis, long-term corre-

lations, and extreme events,” Phys. Rev. E, 71, 56106 (2005).

26N. Slater, “Gaps and steps for the sequence nθ mod 1,” Proc. Cambridge

Philos. Soc., 63, 1115–1123 (1967).

27E. G. Altmann, G. Cristadoro, and D. Paz´o, “Nontwist non-Hamiltonian

systems,” Phys. Rev. E, 73, 056201 (2006).

28M. Baptista, S. Kraut, and C. Grebogi, “Poincar´e recurrence and measure
of hyperbolic and nonhyperbolic chaotic attractors,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 95,
094101 (2005).

29D. Faranda, V. Lucarini, G. Turchetti, and S. Vaienti, “Generalized extreme
value distribution parameters as dynamical indicators of stability,” Int. J.
Bifurcation Chaos, 22, 1250276 (2012).

30B. V. Chirikov and D. L. Shepelyansky, “Correlation properties of dynami-

cal chaos in Hamiltonian systems,” Physica D, 13, 395–400 (1984).

31Y. Zou, R. V. Donner, J. F. Donges, N. Marwan, and J. Kurths, “Iden-
tifying shrimps in continuous dynamical systems using recurrence-based
methods,” Chaos, 20, 043130 (2010).

32R. V. Donner, J. Heitzig, J. F. Donges, Y. Zou, N. Marwan, and J. Kurths,
“The geometry of chaotic dynamics – a complex network perspective,” Eur.
Phys. J. B, 84, 653–672 (2011).

33J. F. Donges, R. V. Donner, K. Rehfeld, N. Marwan, M. H. Trauth, and
J. Kurths, “Identiﬁcation of dynamical transitions in marine palaeoclimate
records by recurrence network analysis,” Nonlin. Proc. Geophys., 18, 545–
562 (2011).

11

34J. F. Donges, R. V. Donner, M. H. Trauth, N. Marwan, H. J. Schellnhu-
ber, and J. Kurths, “Nonlinear detection of paleoclimate-variability tran-
sitions possibly related to human evolution,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
108, 20422–20427 (2011).

35J. F. Donges, J. Heitzig, R. V. Donner, and J. Kurths, “Analytical framework
for recurrence network analysis of time series,” Phys. Rev. E, 85, 046105
(2012).

36K. Tsiganis, A. Anastasiadis, and H. Varvoglis, “Dimensionality differ-
ences between sticky and non-sticky chaotic trajectory segments in a 3D
Hamiltonian system,” Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 13, 2281-2292 (2000).
37M. Thiel, M. Romano, P. Read, and J. Kurths, “Estimation of dynami-
cal invariants without embedding by recurrence plots,” Chaos, 14, 234–243
(2004).

38R. V. Donner, Y. Zou, J. F. Donges, N. Marwan, and J. Kurths, “Ambigu-
ities in recurrence-based complex network representations of time series,”
Phys. Rev. E, 81, 015101(R) (2010).

39F. Freistetter, “Fractal dimensions as chaos indicators,” Cel. Mech. Dyn.

Astron., 78, 211–225 (2000).

40G. Zaslavsky, Physics of Chaos in Hamiltonian Systems (Imperial College

Press, London, 1998).

41J. D. Meiss, “Class renormalization: Islands around islands,” Phys. Rev. A,

34, 2375–2383 (1986).

42M. H´enon and C. Heiles, “The applicability of the third integral of motion:

some numerical experiments,” Astronom. J., 69, 73–79 (1964).

43G. A. Gottwald and C. Skokos, “Preface to the focus issue: Chaos detection

methods and predictability,” Chaos, 24, 024201 (2014).

44N. Asghari, C. Broeg, L. Carone, R. Casas-Miranda, J. C. C. Palacio,
I. Csillik, R. Dvorak, F. Freistetter, G. Hadjivantsides, H. Hussmann,
A. Khramova, M. Khristoforova, I. Khromova, I. Kitiashivilli, S. Ko-
zlowski, T. Laakso, T. Laczkowski, D. Lytvinenko, O. Miloni, R. Mor-
ishima, A. Moro-Martin, V. Paksyutov, A. Pal, V. Patidar, B. Pecnik, O. Pe-
les, J. Pyo, T. Quinn, A. Rodriguez, C. Romano, E. Saikia, J. Stadel,
M. Thiel, N. Todorovic, D. Veras, E. V. Neto, J. Vilagi, W. von Bloh,
R. Zechner, and E. Zhuchkova, “Stability of terrestrial planets in the hab-
itable zone of GI77A, HD72659, GI614, 47Uma and HD4208,” Astron.
Astrophys., 426, 353–365 (2004).

45Y. Zou, M. Thiel, M. C. Romano, Q. Bi, and J. Kurths, “Shrimp struc-
ture and associated dynamics in parametrically excited oscillators,” Int. J.
Bifurcation Chaos, 16, 3567–3579 (2006).

46J. Zhang and M. Small, “Complex network from pseudoperiodic time se-

ries: Topology versus dynamics,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 238701 (2006).

47X. Xu, J. Zhang, and M. Small, “Superfamily phenomena and motifs of net-
works induced from time series,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 19601–
19605 (2008).

48L. Lacasa, B. Luque, F. Ballesteros, J. Luque, and J. C. Nuno, “From time
series to complex networks: The visibility graph,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 105, 4972–4975 (2008).

49A. Facchini and H. Kantz, “Curved structures in recurrence plots: The role

of the sampling time,” Phys. Rev. E, 75, 036215 (2007).

50M. E. J. Newman, “The structure and function of complex networks,” SIAM

Rev., 45, 167–256 (2003).

51S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D.-U. Hwang, “Com-
plex networks: Structure and dynamics,” Phys. Rep., 424, 175–308 (2006).
52D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of “small-world” net-

works,” Nature, 393, 440–442 (1998).

53A. Barrat and M. Weigt, “On the properties of small-world network mod-

els,” Eur. Phys. J. B, 13, 547–560 (2000).

54M. E. J. Newman, “Scientiﬁc collaboration networks. i. network construc-

tion and fundamental results,” Phys. Rev. E, 64, 016131 (2001).

55G. A. Gottwald and I. Melbourne, “A new test for chaos in deterministic

systems,” Proc. R. Soc. London A, 460, 603–611 (2004).

