6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
8
3
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Space-resolved diﬀusing wave spectroscopy

measurements of the macroscopic deformation and the

microscopic dynamics in tensile strain tests

Med-Yassine Nagazia,b, Giovanni Brambillab, G´erard Meunierb, Philippe

Marguer`esc, Jean-No¨el P´eri´ec, Luca Cipellettia

aLaboratoire Charles Coulomb (L2C), UMR 5221 CNRS-Universit´e de Montpellier,

Montpellier, F-France

bFormulaction, L’Union, F-France

cInstitut Cl´ement Ader (ICA), UMR 5312 CNRS-Universit´e F´ed´erale Toulouse

Midi-Pyr´en´ees, Toulouse, F-France

Abstract

We couple a laser-based, space-resolved dynamic light scattering apparatus to

a universal testing machine for mechanical extensional tests. We perform si-

multaneous optical and mechanical measurements on polyether ether ketone, a

semi-crystalline polymer widely used in the industry. Due to the high turbidity

of the sample, light is multiply scattered by the sample and the diﬀusing wave

spectroscopy (DWS) formalism is used to interpret the data. Space-resolved

DWS yields spatial maps of the sample strain and of the microscopic dynamics.

An excellent agreement is found between the strain maps thus obtained and

those measured by a conventional stereo-correlation bench. The microscopic

dynamics reveals both aﬃne motion and plastic rearrangements. Thanks to the

extreme sensitivity of DWS to displacements as small as 1 nm, plastic activity

and its spatial localization can be detected at an early stage of the sample defor-

mation, making the technique presented here a valuable complement to existing

material characterization methods.

Keywords:

tensile test, light scattering, diﬀusing wave spectroscopy, plasticity

Email addresses: mohamed-yassine.nagazi@umontpellier.fr (Med-Yassine Nagazi),

luca.cipelletti@umontpellier.fr (Luca Cipelletti)

Preprint submitted to Optics and Lasers in Engineering

March 22, 2016

1. Introduction

The characterization of the mechanical properties of a material is a key step

in the development of new materials, as well as in tests of existing materials for

industrial applications and in quality control programs, e.g. during production.

Mechanical tests typically consist in imposing a deformation to the sample while

measuring the resistance force exerted by it, or, alternatively, in measuring the

deformation for a given applied force. This is the case, e.g., of tensile tests,

where a universal testing machine (UTM) imposes a tensile deformation and

measures the associated tensile force. These tests yield basic information on

both the linear elasticity (e.g. via the Young modulus E) and the sample be-

havior beyond the linear regime, up to mechanical failure. The latter may occur

due to a sudden breakage, as in the fracture of fragile materials, or may stem

from a very large, irreversible plastic deformation, as in ductile materials. More

insight on the material behavior can be gained by coupling these macroscopic

measurements to more local ones. A popular example is the measurement of the

full, mesoscopic strain ﬁeld, rather than the global, macroscopic strain alone.

This can be achieved using a stereo-correlation bench (SCB), where a pair of

cameras take pictures of the sample surface during the mechanical test. The

surface is treated in such a way to create a contrasted pattern, e.g. by spray-

painting it with a dotted pattern. Image correlation methods [1] are used to

follow the displacement of small regions of the pattern, thereby determining a

spatial map of the strain ﬁeld. By examining the strain maps valuable informa-

tion can be obtained, e.g. by detecting small deviations from the uniform strain

ﬁeld expected in the linear regime, which may reveal at an early stage strain

localization that eventually will result in macroscopic damage, such as necking.

Spray-painting, however, comes with some limitations: for some materials, it

may be diﬃcult to apply a paint coat. Furthermore, the paint ﬁlm may partially

detach from its substrate, especially for large deformations, leading to artifacts

in the measurement of the actual strain ﬁeld. An appealing alternative is to

illuminate the sample with laser light. Due to the coherence of the laser source,

2

light backscattered or back-reﬂected by the sample forms a random interfer-

ence pattern, termed speckle pattern [2]. The speckle pattern has a contrasted,

grainy appearance and the speckle size can be easily tuned by changing the

aperture stop of the objective lens used to image the sample. Any displacement

of the sample is mirrored by a displacement of the speckle pattern, so that the

strain ﬁeld may be reconstructed by using the same techniques as in conven-

tional image correlations methods. Contrary to the pattern obtained by spray

painting, however, the speckle pattern is extremely sensitive not only to a rigid

displacement of the sample, but also to the relative motion of its constituents,

on length scales that for turbid, multiply scattering materials can be as small

as a fraction of nm [3]. As a consequence, not only does the speckle pattern of

a strained sample deform, but it also decorrelates.

While the decorrelation of the speckles in a sample under stress limits the

possibility of following its macroscopic deformation [1], it also provides an op-

portunity for characterizing the deformation ﬁeld at the microscopic level. This

has been recognized since the early developments of diﬀusing wave spectroscopy

(DWS), a scattering technique in the multiple scattering regime [3]. In DWS,

the decorrelation of the speckle pattern generated by a turbid sample illumi-

nated by a laser beam can be quantitatively related to the relative motion of the

objects responsible for the scattering. The latter may be, e.g., tracer particles in

a ﬂuid or embedded in a solid matrix, or, more generally, the ﬂuctuations of the

refractive index associated with variations of the local density or composition of

the sample. While most studies have been devoted to the case where the micro-

scopic dynamics is induced by thermal energy, as for Brownian motion, the case

where the dynamics result predominantly from an applied deformation or stress

has also been investigated. Wu and coworkers have related the speckle decor-

relation measured by DWS to the shear rate in a ﬂuid under Poiseuille laminar

ﬂow [4]. Bicout et al. have generalized the approach of Ref. [4] to an arbitrary

deformation [5], expressing the speckle patter decorrelation as a function of the

strain tensor. Their formalism has been used to analyze experimental speckle

decorrelation data for a random close packing of sub-millimeter glass spheres

3

subject to thermal expansion [6]. This experiment has highlighted the extreme
sensitivity of the technique, since relative dilations as small as 10−6 could be
measured.

In Refs. [4, 5, 6] the speckle ﬁeld was analyzed in the far ﬁeld, such that

the detector was illuminated by light issued from the whole scattering volume,

with no spatial selectivity. In this conﬁguration, the evolution of the speckle

pattern is only due to the relative motion of the scatterers. A diﬀerent approach

has been introduced in a subsequent series of experiments by the group of J.

Crassous [7, 8], where the speckle patter was collected in an imaging geometry,

such that diﬀerent areas of the 2D detector corresponded to diﬀerent regions of

the sample, a slab of a solid material loaded on one side with a blade in a plane

stress conﬁguration. The measurements of [7, 8] were performed well within the

linear regime, for very small applied stresses: under these conditions, the drift

of the speckle pattern is negligible and only the loss of correlation due to the

relative motion was observable.

In this work, we apply space-resolved DWS to investigate both the meso-

scopic strain ﬁeld and the microscopic dynamics in semi-crystalline and amor-

phous polymers during tensile stress tests. We explore both the linear and

non-linear regimes, such that the evolution of the speckle pattern is due to the

drift of the sample as well as to the microscopic relative motion resulting from

the applied stress. We show that the method yields strain maps comparable to

those obtained by a conventional SCB and can, in addition, detect at an early

stage precursors of plasticity. The paper is organized as follows:

in Sec. 2 we

brieﬂy describe the setup and the sample preparation. Section 3 deals with the

data analysis methods, focussing in particular on space-resolved DWS. The ex-

perimental results are presented and discussed in Sec. 4, followed by some brief

concluding remarks (Sec. 5).

4

2. Materials and setup

2.1. Samples

We perform tensile stress tests on a polyether ether ketone (PEEK) sample,

a semi-crystalline thermoplastic polymer with applications in the automotive,

aerospace, and chemical process industries. The sample is prepared by heating
PEEK grains (Evonik AG) at T = 375◦C and by injection molding them in the
shape required by the ISO 527-2 standard. A picture of the specimen is shown

in ﬁg. 1c: the width of the gage section is 10 mm, that of the grip section is 20

mm, the distance between shoulders is 109 mm, the overall length 170 mm and

the thickness 4 mm. The side shown in ﬁg. 1c has been spray-painted to obtain

a spotted pattern for measuring the sample deformation using digital image

correlation techniques. We run complementary measurements on polypropylene

reinforced by glass ﬁbers (PPG), prepared following the protocol of Ref. [9]. The

shape of the PPG specimen is the same as that of the PEEK sample, except

for the distance between shoulders and the overall length, which are 95 mm and

156 mm, respectively.

2.2. Setup

Figure 1a shows a schematic view of the setup. The sample is held in a

vertical plane by two clamps; the bottom clamp can be pulled downward at a

controlled speed. A force sensor measures the tensile force Ft exerted by the

sample. A conventional stereo-correlation bench (SCB) comprising CCD cam-

eras 1 and 2 takes images of the sample surface in order to reconstruct the local

displacement. Images are recorded at a rate of 0.1 Hz for subsequent process-

ing with the SCB software. On the opposite side of the SCB, the sample is

illuminated by a laser beam (Photon module by Prophotonics, with wavelength

λ = 635 nm, power 20 mW, linearly polarized) in order to perform space-

resolved diﬀusing wave spectroscopy (PCI-DWS) measurements. A lens (not

shown) is used to expand the laser beam so as to cover the full ﬁeld of view of

the CMOS camera, which images the sample surface. The ﬁeld of view of the

5

Figure 1: Experimental setup. a): Schematic side view of the experimental apparatus. The

sample is hold by two clamps. The two cameras on the left are used for conventional stereo-

imaging. The CMOS camera on the right images the laser light backscattered by the sample,

for space-resolved DWS. b): time dependence of the displacement of the moving clamp during

the test, which alternates stretching phases (red shade) with relaxation phases (blue shade).

For clarity, only the ﬁrst 2 phases out of a total of 12 are shown. c): typical SCB image

of the specimen. d): typical speckle image for PCI-DWS. e) zoom on a small portion of d)

(magniﬁed 1.65x with respect to d)).

6

Fixed clamp Moving clamp Stereo-correlation bench Space-resolved DWS CMOS     sample 05010015020025001z (mm)t (s)z a) b) y c) d) e) CMOS camera covers the full width of the sample and extends from the top

clamp to z = 93.5 mm, about 85.7% of the sample height. The CMOS images

are recorded at a rate of 10 Hz and processed oﬀ-line as explained in Sec. 3.2.

Measurements with the SCB and by PCI-DWS are performed simultaneously.

The test consists of a series of 12 traction phases at a constant imposed speed
of 3.33 × 10−2 mm s−1, each lasting 30 s. Between two consecutive traction
phases, the sample is held at a constant deformation for 90 s (relaxation phase).

The graph in ﬁg. 1b shows the displacement of the lower clamp as function of

time t, for the ﬁrst two traction and relaxation phases. Two sensors record both

the lower clamp displacement and the tensile force throughout the experiment.

Self-locking clamps are used, which results in a slight motion of the part of the

clamp in contact with the sample with respect to the part ﬁxed to the apparatus,

as seen by inspecting the SCB and the CMOS images.

In the following, we

systematically correct for this eﬀect, so that all positions and velocities are

measured with respect to a reference frame where the upper part of the sample

is immobile.

3. Data analysis

3.1. Stereo-imaging

An image of the sample as seen by the SCB cameras is shown in ﬁg. 1c.

Commercial software (VIC-2D by Correlated Solutions) is used to analyze the

SCB images, in order to reconstruct the displacement of the sample due to

the applied tensile strain. The software is based on digital image correlation

methods (see Ref. [1] for a review) that quantify the displacement of a pattern

painted on the sample surface. The analysis is performed by dividing each image
in regions of interest (ROIs), whose size on the sample is 0.34 × 0.31 mm2. For
each ROI, the SCB software provides the displacement components along three

orthogonal axes; in the following we will only focus on the z component, along

the pulling direction.

7

3.2. Space-resolved diﬀusing wave spectroscopy (PCI-DWS)

Figures 1d-e show images of the sample illuminated by the laser beam: the

distinctive speckle pattern is due to the interference between photons backscat-

tered by the sample and emerging at the sample surface. The PEEK and PPG

samples are highly turbid, due to signiﬁcant spatial ﬂuctuations of their refrac-

tive index. Thus, the photons undergo many scattering event before leaving the

sample; within the DWS formalism, their path is described as a random walk
with step size (cid:96)∗, the photon mean transport path [3]. In conventional DWS,
the detector is placed in the far ﬁeld and the temporal evolution of the speckle

pattern yields information only on the relative motion at the microscopic level,

averaged over the whole illuminated sample volume. Here, by contrast, we use

the Photon Correlation Imaging (PCI) conﬁguration [10, 11], where an image

of the sample is formed.

In PCI, each region of the detector corresponds to

a well-deﬁned region of the sample, so that spatially-resolved measurements of

the dynamics are accessible. Additionally, any macroscopic drift of the sample

entails a drift of the speckle image, so that a map of the sample deformation

can be obtained using cross-correlation methods similar to those applied in the

analysis of the SCB images [11], but with no need to physically paint the sample

surface.

In order to quantify both the microscopic relative motion and the macro-

scopic drift, the image is divided in ROIs. For each ROI, the key quantity to

be computed is the two-time, spatio-temporal degree of correlation

(cid:104)I(y, z, t)I(y + ∆y, z + ∆z, t + τ )(cid:105)zROI

C(zROI, ∆y, ∆z, t, τ ) =
− 1 ,

(cid:104)I(y, z, t)(cid:105)zROI

(cid:104)I(y + ∆y, z + ∆z, t + τ )(cid:105)zROI

(1)

where zROI is the z coordinate of the center of the ROI, which has the same width

as the sample width and height 9.35 mm, I(y, z, t) is the intensity (corrected for

the dark background [12]) of a pixel of coordinates (y, z) at time t, ∆y and ∆z

are spatial shifts, τ a time lag, and (cid:104)· · ·(cid:105)zROI

indicates an average over all pixels

belonging to the ROI. For the sake of clarity, we ﬁrst discuss the behavior of C

in the absence of drift motion, we then switch to the case of a pure translation

8

(no microscopic dynamics), and ﬁnally consider the general case where both

microscopic dynamics and drift coexist.

The ﬁrst case corresponds essentially to traditional DWS, as reviewed, e.g.,

in [3]. In the absence of drift, one sets ∆y = ∆z = 0 in Eq. (2) and studies the

two-time intensity autocorrelation function

g2(zROI, t, τ ) − 1 = β−1 (cid:104)C(zROI, 0, 0, t(cid:48), τ )(cid:105)t≤t(cid:48)≤t+T ,

(2)

where C is averaged over a short time window to improve the statistics (T = 10
s in this work) and β (cid:46) 1 is a setup-dependent constant [13] chosen such that
g2 − 1 → 1 for τ → 0. The intensity autocorrelation function is directly related
to the mean squared displacement < ∆r2(t, τ ) > of the scatterers between time

t and t + τ : in the backscattering geometry of our experiments, one has [3]

(cid:34)

(cid:114)

(cid:35)

g2(zROI, t, τ ) − 1 = A exp

−2γ

k2
0 < ∆r2(t, τ ) > +

3(cid:96)∗
(cid:96)a

,

(3)

with k0 = 2πnλ−1 the wave vector of the incident light, n the sample refractive
index (n = 1.68 for PEEK), and γ a numerical coeﬃcient that depends on the

polarization of the incident and detected light. For a polarized incident beam,

as in our experiments, Ref. [14] quotes γ = 1.5 (respectively, γ = 2.7) when a

polarizer is used to detect only the light with polarization parallel (respectively,

perpendicular) to the z axis. In the experiments described below, no polarizer is

placed in front of the detector; we thus use γ = 1.8, an average of the two values

of Ref. [14] weighted by the relative intensity of the two polarization components
of the backscattered light. The term 3(cid:96)∗/(cid:96)a accounts for light absorption [3],
with (cid:96)a the absorption length, i.e. the length over which the intensity of light
propagating through the sample drops by a factor e−1. The normalization
coeﬃcient A = exp

insures that g2(0) − 1 = 1.

2γ(cid:112)3(cid:96)∗/(cid:96)a

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

The temporal dependence of < ∆r2 > is ruled by the nature of the micro-

scopic dynamics. During the traction phases, the sample undergoes an aﬃne

deformation and, possibly, additional non-aﬃne microscopic displacements. Ne-

glecting the drift associated with the average displacement of the scatterers and

9

assuming that thermal motion is negligible, the mean square displacement for

a sample undergoing aﬃne deformation is [5, 6, 7, 8]

< ∆r2(τ ) >= 3(cid:96)∗2f [U(τ )] ,

(4)

where f (U) = [Tr2(U) + 2Tr(U2)]/15 is a function of the strain tensor U. For

a tensile strain of constant rate ˙ε applied to a material with Poisson’s ratio ν

(5)

U(τ ) =

and hence

0

0

0


−ν ˙ετ
(cid:2)(1 − 2ν)2 + 2(1 + 2ν2)(cid:3) .

0
−ν ˙ετ
0

˙ετ

0

( ˙ετ )2

15

f [U(τ )] =

(6)
As shown by Eqs. 3 and 4, the decay rate of g2−1 depends on (cid:96)∗. This is because
in DWS photon paths separated by more than (cid:96)∗ are totally uncorrelated and
do not contribute to g2 − 1. Thus, the decay of g2 − 1 is essentially ruled by
(cid:96)∗ ˙ε, the speed at which two scatterers initially separated by a distance (cid:96)∗ move
with respect to each other, due to the imposed deformation.

If the sample undergoes a pure translation, the spatio-temporal correlation

coeﬃcient C exhibits a peak at a spatial lag (∆y, ∆z) corresponding to the

rigid shift between times t and t + τ . As long as no microscopic dynamics occur,

the height of the peak is always the same, regardless of the magnitude of the

displacement. By locating the position of the peak, the sample displacement

can be obtained, similarly to the image analysis for the SCB. In order to obtain

the displacement with sub-pixel resolution, we use a dedicated algorithm that

is optimized for the case where the characteristic size of the pattern (i.e. the

speckle size) is of the order of the pixel size [11]. The typical uncertainty on the

displacement between two images is about 0.05 pixels, corresponding to 2.5 µm.

In the general case, the sample both translates and undergoes some micro-

scopic dynamics. This is the case of our tensile tests, where any given ROI

is shifted in the z direction while being stretched. Thus, the speckle image

both translates (due to the sample drift) and changes (due to the microscopic

10

dynamics associated with the aﬃne deformation and any additional plastic re-

arrangement). Accordingly, C exhibits a peak, whose position shifts in time

and whose height decreases as τ increases. As discussed in [11], in order to

measure the microscopic dynamics one should in principle measure the height

of the peak of C, rather than simply evaluating the correlation coeﬃcient in

∆y = ∆z = 0, as in Eq. (2). However, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between

the two methods, because the peak height decreases much more rapidly than its

position shifts. This is a consequence of the extreme sensitivity of DWS to the
microscopic motion of the scatterers: from Eq. (3) one can estimate that g2 − 1
decreases by a factor of e when the mean squared displacement is as small as
2.8 × 10−16 m2. In the following, we will therefore calculate g2 − 1 using the
simpler formula Eq. (2).

4. Results and discussion

We compare in ﬁg. 2 the velocity proﬁle during the ﬁrst traction phase, as

measured by SCB and by PCI-DWS. The SCB velocity proﬁle, vSCB(z), is cal-

culated as the displacement between two consecutive images, divided by the

time lag τ = 10 s. As seen in ﬁg. 2 (solid squares), vSCB(z) increases linearly

with the distance z from the ﬁxed clamp, as expected for a purely aﬃne defor-

mation. Indeed, the data are in excellent agreement with vaf f , the theoretical

proﬁle calculated assuming aﬃne deformation (line in ﬁg. 2). The error bars,

calculated as the standard deviation over the measured displacement for the

ROIs at the same z but diﬀerent coordinate y along the width of the sample,

are smaller than the symbol size. The velocity proﬁle obtained by PCI-DWS

(vDWS, open circles) is in very good agreement with both the theoretical ex-

pectations and the SCB one. To obtain vDWS, we measure the displacement

∆zDWS(zROI, t, τ ) of a ROI located at z = zROI between times t and t + τ .

The τ dependence of ∆zDWS is then ﬁtted by a straight line through the origin,

whose slope yields the local velocity between times t and t + τ . vDWS and its

uncertainty are ﬁnally obtained as the average and standard deviation of the

11

Figure 2: Comparison of the velocity proﬁles. Main ﬁgure: velocity proﬁles during the

ﬁrst stretching phase as measured by a conventional stereo-correlation bench (vSCB, black

squares) and by space-resolved DWS (vDWS, open red circles), for a PEEK sample. The line

indicates the imposed velocity proﬁle, assuming a perfectly aﬃne deformation. Inset: vDWS

vs vSCB for the same data as in the main panel (blue crosses) and for a PPG sample (open

green triangles).

12

0204060801000.000.010.000.010.000.01 vSCB  vDWSvDWS (mm s-1)vSCB, vDWS (mm s-1) z (mm) PP PEEKvSCB (mm s-1)instantaneous velocity thus calculated, for t in the same 10-second interval as

for the pair of SCB images. The choice of the maximum τ for which the linear

ﬁt is performed is optimized for each ROI: if τ is too small, the displacements

are close to the measurement uncertainty, resulting in a poor determination of

vDWS. Conversely, for too large a τ the speckle pattern is not only shifted, but

it is also signiﬁcantly shuﬄed, because of the relative motion of the scatterers

associated with aﬃne deformation, as discussed in Sec. 3.2. This makes it im-

possible to detect the displacement in a reliable way using the cross-correlation

methods sketched above. For the data of ﬁg. 2, typical values of the maximum

delay used for determining vDWS range from 2 to 5 s. We emphasize that this

correspond to displacements as small as 0.1 pixels, which highlights the impor-

tance of measuring the speckle motion with sub-pixel resolution. Finally, we
note that the error bars on vDWS are of order 6 × 10−4 mm s−1. This corre-
spond to a relative error of about 10% for an intermediate ROI, about a factor

of 20 larger than the uncertainty on vSCB. Part of this uncertainty may be due

to slight ﬂuctuations of the pulling velocity during the test, since vDWS is cal-

culated by analyzing the 100 CMOS frames available during a 10 s interval, as

opposed to vSCB for which only two frames are used. Moreover, in our tests the

illumination conditions were not optimized for PCI-DWS, due to the need to

perform simultaneous measurements with both techniques. In particular, some

white light from the SCB illumination leaked onto the PCI-DWS CMOS, in-

troducing ﬂare that reduced the contrast of the speckle images. However, even

if the noise on vDWS may be reduced by optimizing the setup, we expect it to

be still larger than that achievable by a conventional SCB. Indeed, both meth-

ods use cross-correlation techniques to detect the motion of a pattern; however,

the painted pattern imaged by SCB is essentially unmodiﬁed when stretching

the sample, while the speckle pattern decorrelates quite rapidly, as a result of

the microscopic motion associated with sample deformation. Accordingly, it is

more diﬃcult to follow precisely the displacement of the speckle pattern than

that of the painted surface. We note however that the very same sensitivity of

DWS to the microscopic dynamics that here somehow limits the precision on

13

Figure 3: Onset of plastic deformation. a): stereo correlation bench image of the PEEK

sample after the 12th traction phase. A neck is clearly visible (arrows). b): deviation of

the velocity proﬁle with respect to a purely aﬃne deformation. Data are obtained with a
conventional stereo-correlation bench, for 1 ≤ k ≤ 12 traction phases, as indicated by the
labels.

vDWS provides on the other hand vary valuable information on the microscopic

motion and rearrangements associated with the macroscopic deformation, as

we shall discuss it in the following. The inset of ﬁg. 2 shows vDWS vs vSCB,

for the PEEK sample (same data as in the main plot) and for a PP glass. In

both cases, the data conﬁrm that the two methods yield the same results, to

within experimental uncertainties. This validates PCI-DWS as an alternative

or complementary method to conventional SCB to measure macroscopic sample

deformation.

Both the SCB and PCI-DWS images show that at large imposed ∆z the

deformation is no more uniform, but rather concentrates around z = 51 mm,

where the sample forms a distinctive neck, as shown in ﬁg. 3a. By simple

visual inspection, the neck starts to be detectable after the 10-th stretching

phase. We analyze both SCB and PCI-DWS data to asses whether such plastic

14

050100-0.004-0.0020.0000.0020.004 1  2  3  4 5  6  7  8 9  10  11  12v (mm s-1)z (mm)a) b) deformation can be detected earlier by a more reﬁned approach. Figure 3b
shows ∆v = vSCB − vaf f , the deviation of the SCB velocity proﬁle with respect
to aﬃne deformation, for the 12 stretching phases. Up to the stretching phase
k = 4, ∆v is close to zero for all z, with no systematic behavior. For k ≥ 7,
∆z develops a characteristic swinging appearance: close to the ﬁx clamp, the

deformation is less than expected (∆v < 0), while it grows rapidly with z

around the region where the neck will appear, and ﬁnally converges from above
to the aﬃne deformation value close to the moving clamp (∆v ≥ 0). For the
intermediate stretching phases, 4 (cid:46) k ≤ 6, the behavior of ∆z is diﬃcult to
be precisely assessed. On the one hand, deviations with respect to vaf f are

comparable in magnitude to those of the ﬁrst stretching phases, which may be

interpreted that no deviations with respect to aﬃne deformation are seen within

experimental noise. On the other hand, a swinging behavior qualitatively similar

to that seen at larger k appears to develop, which might be the signature of the

onset of plasticity.

The deviations of the stretching speed with respect to an aﬃne deformation
shown in ﬁg. 3 are at most of a few 10−3 mm s−1, comparable to the typical
uncertainty on vDWS. Thus, it is not possible to observe them directly using

PCI-DWS. Instead, we exploit the great sensitivity of DWS to the microscopic
dynamics. The open circles of Fig. 4 show the intensity correlation function g2−1
measured during the ﬁrst stretching phase, for a ROI with zROI = 23.375 mm .

The decay of the correlation function is due to the microscopic dynamics in-

duced by the applied strain: we emphasize that no decay of g2 is seen over at

least several thousands of seconds when the sample is left unperturbed. We

ﬁrst attempt to ﬁt the correlation function with the theoretical form predicted
for a purely aﬃne deformation, Eqs. 3-6, assuming no absorption, (cid:96)∗/(cid:96)a = 0.
In the ﬁt, the only adjustable parameter is the strain rate ˙ε. The wave vector
is ﬁxed to k0 = 1.66 × 107 m−1, the Poisson ratio is set to ν = 0.4 [15], and
(cid:96)∗ = 61.1 µm is measured independently using the method of Refs. [16, 17, 18].
As shown by the dotted line, the ﬁt does not capture correctly the shape of
g2 − 1. By contrast, an excellent agreement (solid red line) is obtained when

15

Figure 4: Microscopic dynamics during the ﬁrst traction phase. Intensity correlation

function measured while applying a tensile deformation at constant strain rate. Open circles:

raw data for a ROI located at zROI = 23.375 mm. The dotted (solid) red lines are the

predictions for a purely aﬃne deformation, Eqs. 3-6, where the eﬀect of absorption has not
(has) been taken into account. Solid symbols: g2 − 1 corrected for the eﬀect of absorbtion
for ROIs with 14.025 mm ≤ zROI =≤ 51.425 mm. The lines are ﬁts for a purely aﬃne
deformation, yielding ˙ε = (5.0 ± 0.5) × 10−4 s−1.

16

10-11001010.00.20.40.60.81.0 ROI 3, no correction         for absorbtion g2-1 corrected for absorption ROI 2  ROI 3 ROI 4  ROI 5 ROI 6 g2() -1  (s)including the absorption term, with a ﬁtted value (cid:96)a = 0.014 m. Similar values

of (cid:96)a are obtained by ﬁtting the data for the other ROIs. In the following, we
systematically correct g2 − 1 for the eﬀects of absorption using (cid:96)a = (9± 3) mm,
as obtained by averaging the results for all ROIs. Absorption-corrected inten-

sity correlation functions are obtained by solving Eq. 3 for < ∆r2(τ ) > using
the experimental g2 − 1 and the known values of γ, k0, (cid:96)∗ and (cid:96)a. The cor-
rected g2 − 1 is then calculated from < ∆r2(τ ) >, using Eq. 3 with (cid:96)∗/(cid:96)a = 0.
Figure 4 shows as solid symbols the absorption-corrected g2 − 1 for ROIs with
14.025 mm ≤ zROI =≤ 51.425 mm. All data nearly collapse on a single curve,
as expected if the decay rate is indeed controlled solely by the strain rate, which

is the same throughout the sample. Moreover, the data are very well ﬁtted by

an exponential decay (solid lines), the behavior expected when the mean square

displacement grows ballistically in time, as for a purely aﬃne deformation at a

constant rate. The only ﬁt parameter is ˙ε: by averaging the ﬁt results for all
ROIs we ﬁnd ˙ε = (5.0±0.5)×10−4 s−1. This value is about 2.5 times larger than
˙ε = 2.02 × 10−4 s−1, the macroscopic strain rate obtained from the displace-
ment velocity of the bottom clamp. This discrepancy may stem from non-aﬃne

displacements not accounted for by Eq. 5 that enhance the microscopic mo-

bility.

Indeed, numerical and experimental work on amorphous systems has

highlighted the importance of non-aﬃne motion even in the linear regime, due

to local ﬂuctuations of the elastic modulus [19, 20]. Such heterogeneity of E

is likely to occur in PEEK, due to its complex structure, where crystalline do-

mains coexist with amorphous regions. We furthermore note that a discrepancy

between the strain measured by DWS and that expected from the macroscopic

material properties was also observed in Ref. [7], although with an opposite

trend, since the microscopic strain was found to be about 5 times smaller than

the macroscopic one. As argued in [7], these diﬀerences may also stem from the

approximations introduced in the DWS formalism (see e.g. [5, 21, 7] for more

details), which result in some uncertainty on the precise value of the numerical

prefactor 1/15 in Eq. 6. We thus conclude that DWS correctly captures the

time dependence of the strain evolution and that Eqs. 3-6 allow one to retrieve

17

the microscopic strain rate quantitatively, to within a factor of 2. The DWS

data taken during the ﬁrst stretching phase can then be used as a benchmark

against which comparing the measurements for the successive stretching phases,

in order to detect the onset of plasticity.

We take advantage of the imaging geometry of our DWS experiments to

resolve the evolution of the dynamics during the stretching phases at diﬀerent

sample locations. Figure 5 shows the absorption-corrected correlation functions

for various stretching phases, for two ROIs, located at zROI = 14.075 mm (a),

close to the ﬁxed clamp) and zROI = 42.075 mm (b), close to where necking
eventually occurs). To better appreciate the changes of the dynamics, g2 − 1 is
plotted in a semilogarithmic scale, for which the ballistic motion associated with

a purely aﬃne deformation corresponds to a straight line. Close to the ﬁxed

clamp (Fig. 5a), the dynamics are overall consistent with ballistic motion up to

the stretching phase k = 9. The decay becomes increasingly steeper up to k = 5,

although the change is modest. Beyond k = 5, the decay rate follows an opposite

trend: the dynamics are increasingly slower, in spite that the macroscopically

imposed strain rate remains the same. For k = 10 the dynamics strongly deviate

from those expected for an aﬃne deformation and the microscopic displacements

ar far more restricted than what expected from the imposed deformation rate.

For the ROI at zROI = 42.075 mm (Fig. 5b) the scenario is completely diﬀerent:

the dynamics speed up continuously and signiﬁcantly from one stretching phase

to the next one, such that the relaxation rate for k = 10 is 2.6 times faster than

that during the ﬁrst stretching phase. The data shown in Fig. 5a,b) suggest

that additional microscopic displacements, most likely due to plastic activity,

enhance the dynamics since the earliest stretching phases. However, as the the

accumulated strain grows, these dynamics become increasingly heterogeneous:

plasticity tends to concentrate in the ROI at zROI = 42.075 mm, which in turn

leads to a decrease of the dynamical activity in the other regions of the sample.

Remarkably, the changes of the microscopic dynamics and their localisation are

observed since the ﬁrst few stretching phases, much earlier than the appearance

of macroscopic heterogeneity in the strain and necking. These observations sug-

18

Figure 5: Microscopic dynamics and plasticity. a) Absorption-corrected intensity cor-

relation functions measured in a ROI close to the ﬁxed clamp, for the ﬁrst 10 stretching

phases, as indicated by the label. b) Same, for a ROI approximately located where a neck is

macroscopically observable after the 10-th stretching phase. c) Relative standard deviation of
the relaxation time of g2 − 1 measured at diﬀerent locations, as a function of the stretching
phase. The increase of spatial ﬂuctuations of the relaxation time for k ≥ 5 signals the onset
of plasticity.

19

02468100.00.20.40.60.8sdv[r]/mean[r] stretching phase k 01230.010.11c)b) 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6zROI = 14.025 mmg2-1(s)zROI = 42.075 mma)0123 gest that a convenient indicator of the onset of plasticity at the microscopic

level may be obtained by quantifying the spatial heterogeneity of the dynam-

ics. To this end, we measure for each ROI the relaxation time τr, deﬁned by
g2(τr) − 1 = exp(−1), and plot in Fig. 5c) σrel,τ , the standard deviation of τr
over all ROIs, normalized by its mean, as a function of the stretching phase k.
The growth of this indicator for k ≥ 5 reﬂects the increasing localization of the
rearrangement dynamics: τr decreases in the region that eventually will develop

a macroscopic neck, while it grows in the other ROI. Note that σrel,τ evolves

signiﬁcantly much earlier than when any strain heterogeneity may be detected

macroscopically: this sensitivity, combined to the capability of mapping spa-

tially the rearrangements, demonstrates the interest of PCI-DWS as a tool for

investigating the non-linear material properties in mechanical tests.

5. Conclusions

We have introduced a new setup that couples space-resolved light scattering

(PCI-DWS) to a universal testing machine equipped with a stereo-correlation

bench (SCB). Light scattering allows one to measure both the mesoscopic sam-

ple displacement, yielding space-resolved strain maps, and the microscopic dy-

namics. The strain maps obtained by PCI-DWS are fully consistent with those

issued from the stereo-correlation bench. Contrary to SCB, light scattering

measurements of the displacement ﬁeld do not require the surface of the sample

to be spray-painted; moreover, DWS-PCI probes the full thickness of the sam-

ple, and not only its surface, as for SCB. Thus, the method presented here is

less sensitive to artifacts that may arise from a diﬀerential deformation of the

surface vs. the bulk and can easily be applied to any material, with no concerns

on the feasibility and the stability of spray coating, including at large strains.

In the tests presented here, the precision on the displacement ﬁeld retrieved by

PCI-DWS is somehow worse than that of SCB, although there is certainly room

for improvements, e.g. by optimizing the illumination conditions. A unique

feature of DWS is the possibility of quantifying the microscopic dynamics down

20

to length scales smaller than a nm. Here, the microscopic dynamics measured

by DWS during the earlier traction phases was shown to be consistent with

that expected for aﬃne deformation. By contrast, as the cumulated strain is in-

creased, PCI-DWS reveals deviations from linear elasticity and localized plastic

activity, well before any macroscopic evidence of plasticity.

The work presented here highlights the great potential of PCI-DWS as a com-

plementary tool to investigate the response of a material to a mechanical drive,

both at the mesoscopic and microscopic level. Further developments of this

method may include its application to other kinds of perturbations (e.g. ther-

mal), and its extension to nearly transparent materials, in the single scattering

regime. Single scattering space-resolved light scattering has already been ap-

plied to investigate the deformation ﬁeld of soft colloidal [22] and biological [23]

gels under the action of gravity or internal stresses. It should be straightforward

to extend it to harder materials such as plastics; since single scattering probes

microscopic motion on length scales larger than DWS, we expect a lesser sensi-

tivity to microscopic rearrangements, but a higher precision on the mesoscopic

strain maps.

6. Acknowledgements

We thank J. Crassous for helpful discussions. This work has been supported

by the ANRT under Contract No. 2014/0109 and by the ANR (FAPRES, grant

n. ANR-14-CE32-0005-01).

References

References

[1] B. Pan, K. Qian, H. Xie, A. Asundi, Two-dimensional digital image correla-

tion for in-plane displacement and strain measurement: a review, Meas. Sci.

Technol. 20 (6) (2009) 062001. doi:10.1088/0957-0233/20/6/062001.

21

[2] J. W. Goodman, Speckle phenomena in optics: theory and applications,

Roberts and Company, Englewood, 2007.

[3] D. A. Weitz, D. J. Pine, Diﬀusing-wave spectroscopy, in: W. Brown (Ed.),

Dynamic Light scattering, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1993, pp. 652–720.

[4] X.-L. Wu, D. J. Pine, P. M. Chaikin, J. S. Huang, D. A. Weitz, Diﬀusing-

wave spectroscopy in a shear ﬂow, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 7 (1) (1990) 15.

doi:10.1364/JOSAB.7.000015.

[5] D. Bicout, R. Maynard, Diﬀusing wave spectroscopy in inhomogeneous

ﬂows, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 199 (3) (1993)

387–411. doi:10.1016/0378-4371(93)90056-A.

[6] J. Crassous, Diﬀusive Wave Spectroscopy of a random close packing of

spheres, Eur. Phys. J. E 23 (2) (2007) 145–152.

doi:10.1140/epje/

i2006-10079-y.

[7] M. Erpelding, A. Amon, J. Crassous, Diﬀusive wave spectroscopy applied

to the spatially resolved deformation of a solid, Phys. Rev. E 78 (4) (2008)

046104. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.78.046104.

[8] M. Erpelding, B. Dollet, A. Faisant, J. Crassous, A. Amon, Diﬀusing-

Wave Spectroscopy Contribution to Strain Analysis: Diﬀusing-Wave Spec-

troscopy Contribution to Strain Analysis, Strain 49 (2) (2013) 167–174.

doi:10.1111/str.12024.

[9] M. Etcheverry, S. E. Barbosa, Glass Fiber Reinforced Polypropylene Me-

chanical Properties Enhancement by Adhesion Improvement, Materials

5 (12) (2012) 1084–1113. doi:10.3390/ma5061084.

[10] A. Duri, D. A. Sessoms, V. Trappe, L. Cipelletti, Resolving Long-Range

Spatial Correlations in Jammed Colloidal Systems Using Photon Correla-

tion Imaging, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 085702–4.

22

[11] L. Cipelletti, G. Brambilla, S. Maccarrone, S. Caroﬀ, Simultaneous mea-

surement of the microscopic dynamics and the mesoscopic displacement

ﬁeld in soft systems by speckle imaging, Opt. Express 21 (2013) 22353–

22366.

[12] A. Duri, H. Bissig, V. Trappe, L. Cipelletti, Time-resolved-correlation

measurements of temporally heterogeneous dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 72

(2005/11/00/) 051401–17.

[13] B. J. Berne, R. Pecora, Dynamic Light Scattering, Wiley, New York, 1976.

[14] F. C. MacKintosh, J. X. Zhu, D. J. Pine, D. A. Weitz, Polarization memory

of multiply scattered light, Phys. Rev. B 40 (13) (1989) 9342–9345. doi:

10.1103/PhysRevB.40.9342.

[15] I. Giraud, Elaboration d’ensimages thermoplastiques thermostables: Inﬂu-

ence sur le comportement m´ecanique des composites PEEK / Fibres de

carbone, Ph.D. thesis, Universit´e Toulouse III - Paul Sabatier, Toulouse

(Jul. 2011).

[16] R. C. Haskell, L. O. Svaasand, T.-T. Tsay, T.-C. Feng, M. S. McAdams,

B. J. Tromberg, Boundary conditions for the diﬀusion equation in radiative

transfer, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 11 (10) (1994) 2727. doi:10.1364/JOSAA.

11.002727.

[17] A. Kienle, M. S. Patterson, Improved solutions of the steady-state and the

time-resolved diﬀusion equations for reﬂectance from a semi-inﬁnite turbid

medium, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 14 (1) (1997) 246. doi:10.1364/JOSAA.14.

000246.

[18] A. Blaise, C. Baravian, J. Dillet, L. Michot, S. Andr´e, Characterization

of the mesostructure of HDPE under “in situ” uniaxial tensile test by in-

coherent polarized steady-light transport, J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys.

50 (5) (2012) 328–337. doi:10.1002/polb.23020.

23

[19] A. Tanguy, J. P. Wittmer, F. Leonforte, J.-L. Barrat, Continuum limit of

amorphous elastic bodies: A ﬁnite-size study of low-frequency harmonic

vibrations, Phys. Rev. B 66 (17). doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.66.174205.

[20] A. Basu, Q. Wen, X. Mao, T. C. Lubensky, P. A. Janmey, A. G. Yodh,

Nonaﬃne Displacements in Flexible Polymer Networks, Macromolecules

44 (6) (2011) 1671–1679. doi:10.1021/ma1026803.

[21] D. Bicout, G. Maret, Multiple light scattering in Taylor-Couette ﬂow, Phys.

Stat. Mech. Its Appl. 210 (1) (1994) 87–112.

[22] G. Brambilla, S. Buzzaccaro, R. Piazza, L. Berthier, L. Cipelletti, Highly

Nonlinear Dynamics in a Slowly Sedimenting Colloidal Gel, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 106 (2011) 118302.

[23] O. Lieleg, J. Kayser, G. Brambilla, L. Cipelletti, A. R. Bausch, Slow dy-

namics and internal stress relaxation in bundled cytoskeletal networks, Nat.

Mater. 10 (2011) 236–242.

24

