6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
4
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Feasibility Studies of the Diffractive

Bremsstrahlung Measurement at the LHC

J. J. Chwastowskia∗, S. Czekierdaa, R. Kyciab,
R. Staszewskia, J. Turnau◦, M. Trzebinskia

aThe Henryk Niewodnicza´nski Institute of Nuclear Physics,

Radzikowskiego 152, 31-342 Kraków, Poland

bDept. of Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science,

Cracow University of Technology, Warszawska 24,

31-155 Kraków, Poland

March 22, 2016

Abstract

Feasibility studies of an observation of the exclusive diffractive brems-
strahlung in proton-proton scattering at the LHC are reported. A simpli-
ﬁed approach to the photon and the scattered proton energy reconstruction is
used. The background inﬂuence is discussed.

1 Introduction

Electromagnetic bremsstrahlung is widely used in various applications. They range
from medicine to advanced methods in structural research. In high energy physics
the bremsstrahlung photons were used, inter alia, to study photoproduction – see
for example [1]. With advent of HERA, it became a very attractive tool. On one
hand the bremsstrahlung events are characterised by a simple and easy to register
ﬁnal state, and on the other hand, in the HERA energy range, the process cross-
section is relatively large and precisely calculable. Therefore, bremsstrahlung was

∗Corresponding author, e-mail: Janusz.Chwastowski@ifj.edu.pl
◦Professor emeritus

1

used to determine the machine absolute and instantaneous luminosities and in ad-
dition it served as an efﬁcient beam diagnostic and monitoring tool (see [2]). The
measurements exploited the basic properties of the ﬁnal state: an approximate en-
ergy conservation as well as the angular properties of radiated photons.

In 2011, V. Khoze et al. [3] postulated an extension of the LHC physics pro-
gramme with the observation of the high energy photon radiated in the elastic
proton-proton scattering event – the study of exclusive diffractive bremsstrahlung.
The measurements of exclusive diffractive bremsstrahlung can be considered as
complementary to the luminometers and luminosity monitors proposed in [4, 5]. It
is also worth noting that this process has never been studied at high energies. The
difference with respect to the electromagnetic bremsstrahlung is that the interaction
is mediated by an exchange of a pomeron. In both electromagnetic and diffractive
processes the exchange is colourless and soft, and the sum of the radiated photon
and the scattered proton energies is nearly equal to the beam energy. The cal-
culations of [3] were considerably extended by P. Lebiedowicz and A. Szczurek
[6] who also introduced the proton formfactor into the calculations. However, the
values of the parameters in their model are based on an educated guess and are sub-
ject to experimental veriﬁcation. The authors of [6] used the Donnachie-Landshoff
parameterisation [7] with linear pomeron trajectory with the intercept 1.0808 and
the slope α(cid:48)
IP = 0.25 GeV−2. The elastic scattering slope evolution is given by
B(s) = BNN

IP lns/s0 where s0 = 1 GeV2 and BNN

IP = 9 GeV−2.

IP + 2· α(cid:48)

P. Lebiedowicz and A. Szczurek considered also other mechanisms leading to
the p pγ ﬁnal state, for example the virtual photon re-scattering. They concluded
that these processes do not play a very important role and can be safely neglected
when considering the forward directions. For a full account of the model details
and its parameters an interested reader is referred to original publications.

In this paper a feasibility study of the diffractive photon bremsstrahlung mea-
surement in proton-proton interactions at the presently available centre of mass
energy of 13 TeV at the LHC is reported. Registration of bremsstrahlung pho-
tons in the ATLAS [8] very forward Zero Degree Calorimeter (ZDC) [9] and the
scattered protons in the ATLAS Forward Proton detector [10] is considered.

2 Experimental Set-up
2.1 Accelerator
During the Long Shutdown 1 the LHC underwent several improvements. In conse-
quence, it delivers proton beams accelerated to 6500 GeV with high instantaneous
luminosity.

2

Figure 1: The LHC magnetic lattice.

The operation mode of the machine can be deﬁned by a set of parameters deﬁn-
ing the properties of its magnetic lattice – the so-called accelerator optics. At the
LHC the name of the set comes after the value of the betatron function1 at the In-
teraction Point (IP), β (cid:63). The nominal or “collision” optics is characterised by the
β (cid:63) value of 0.55 m. Table 1 presents the selected parameters of the proton beams
for the beam emittance2, ε = 3.75 µrad m, collision optics and the beam energy
Ebeam = 6500 GeV.

Table 1: The beam parameters: the angular dispersion, the beam transverse size at
the detector location and the crossing angle for the collision optics for the beam
energy Ebeam = 6500 GeV.

Angular

dispersion [µrad]

31.4

Beam transverse

size [mm]

0.19

Beam crossing
half angle [µrad]

-142.5

The LHC accelerates two proton beams. The one performing clockwise ro-
tation is called beam1, and the other one – beam2. The beams traverse the LHC
magnetic lattice in separate beam pipes which merge into a single one about 140
m away from the Interaction Point (IP). A schematic view of the LHC lattice in
the vicinity of the ATLAS IP is shown in Fig. 1. The quadrupole magnets are la-
belled with “Q”, and the dipole ones – with “D”. The Q1–Q3 quadrupoles serve as
the ﬁnal focusing and the emittance matching triplet, while the D1 and D2 dipoles
are used to separate the proton beams. In the analysis presented below the LHC
magnetic lattice plays a role of the magnetic spectrometer for the scattered forward
particles. In addition there are several corrector magnets, beam position monitors

1The betatron function deﬁnes the distance measured from a given point along the orbit, after

which the beam dimensions in the transverse plane to the motion are doubled.

2The beam emittance measures the spread of the beam particles in the momentum-position phase

space.

3

and collimators, not shown in the ﬁgure. To protect the magnets against the ra-
diation coming from the Interaction Point the Target Absorber Secondaries (TAS)
and the Target Absorber Neutral (TAN) were installed in front of the ﬁnal focusing
triplet and the D2 magnet, respectively.

2.2 Zero Degree Calorimeters
Zero Degree Calorimeters (ZDC) [9] are compact detectors foreseen to measure
neutral particles produced at large pseudorapidities. They are located on both sides
of the ATLAS IP at the distances of 140 m in the slit of the TAN absorber. Each
ZDC is segmented longitudinally with the ﬁrst segment dedicated to the measure-
√
ment of electromagnetic radiation. The energy resolution of the calorimeter for
photons is σ /E = 0.58/
E + 0.12 with
the particle energy measured in GeV. The calorimeter is also the particle impact
position sensitive. Throughout this work, it was assumed that the ZDC spatial res-
olution is 1 mm for photons and 3 mm for neutrons, irrespectively of the incident
particle energy. These values are upper bounds on the resolutions and were esti-
mated during the ZDC tests – see [9] for details. The active area of the ZDC face as
seen from the ATLAS experiment IP is of an approximately rectangular shape with
dimensions 94 mm by 88 mm in horizontal and vertical directions, respectively.

√
E + 0.02 and for neutrons σ /E = 2.1/

2.3 Forward Tracker – AFP
Protons scattered or emitted at very low polar angles escape from the main ATLAS
detector through the accelerator beam pipe and traverse the magnetic lattice of
the machine. They can be registered in the dedicated detectors. Typically, such
detectors use the roman pot technology which allows the precise positioning of the
detectors inside the beam pipe. It is quite clear that the acceptance of the detectors
depends on both the properties of the magnetic spectrometer and the position of
the detector in the beam pipe. The latter is quantiﬁed by a crucial parameter –
the distance between the detector active edge and the beam. One should also note
that in principle a given event can have a single or double tag signature denoting
one or two scattered forward protons. Important variables describing the scattered
the proton transverse momentum, pT , and the relative energy loss,
proton are:
ξ = (Ebeam − E(cid:48)
p is the scattered proton energy and Ebeam is the
beam energy.

p)/Ebeam, where E(cid:48)

The ATLAS Forward Proton (AFP) detectors [10] are foreseen to work during
the usual running of the LHC i.e. in runs with β (cid:63) = 0.55 m. Four AFP stations are
planned. They will be placed symmetrically w.r.t. the ATLAS IP at the distances
of 205 m and 217 m. Each station contains a silicon tracker, which can be inserted

4

horizontally into the beam pipe. The tracker contains four planes of silicon pixel
detectors. The planes are tilted w.r.t. the x axis (horizontal direction) and staggered
in the y axis (vertical) direction. The resulting spatial resolution of the scattered
proton track measurement is about 10 µm and 30 µm in the horizontal and ver-
tical direction, respectively. The distance between the edge of the active part of
the detector and the outer wall (beam side) of the roman pot was assumed to be
0.5 mm. The active detector area projected along the beam direction is 16.3× 20
mm2. The energy of the scattered proton registered by the AFP detector can be
determined with the resolution better than 10 GeV [11]. The outer stations will
contain also the time-of-ﬂight counters providing the timing resolution of about 10
ps, and hence they allow the determination of the interaction vertex location with
precision of about 3 mm. Timing detectors will be of primordial importance in high
instantaneous luminosity runs when high pile-up will be present; however, they do
not play any role in the discussed analysis.

In the case of the collision optics, the AFP detector acceptance is large for the
scattered protons having the relative energy loss within the range (0.02,0.12) [12].

3 Properties of Final State

The exchanged pomeron ensures the four-momentum conservation in the diffrac-
tive bremsstrahlung process:

and since it is soft, the equation

p + p → p + p + γ,

Ebeam ≈ Eγ + E(cid:48)
p,

(1)

where E(cid:48)
p is the scattered proton energy, is fulﬁlled with a very good accuracy. The
process cross-section is of the order of a few microbarns. Moreover, similarly to
the electromagnetic bremsstrahlung, the photon angular distribution is driven by
the radiating particle Lorentz factor γ = Ep/mp

dσ
dΘγ

∼

(cid:16) m2

p
E2
p

(cid:17)2 ,

Θγ
+ Θ2
γ

where Θγ is the polar angle of the emitted photon, mp is the proton mass and
Ep = Ebeam its energy [13].

The average value of the photon polar angle is about 1/γ. In the case of the
radiating proton accelerated to the energy of 6500 GeV, this angle is of the order of

5

144 µrad, which corresponds to the photon pseudorapidity3, η ≈ 9.5. One should
also note that the scattered proton angular distribution is also extremely narrow due
to the large value of the nuclear slope parameter at high energies and its average
value is ∼1/4γ at the LHC energies.

Figure 2: The bremsstrahlung photon polar angle distribution.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of the polar angle of the bremsstrahlung photon.
In Fig. 3 the distribution of the radiating proton relative energy loss, ξ , versus its
transverse momentum, pT is shown. The photon energy spectrum (not shown) is of
a typical shape (∼1/Eγ) and that of the proton relative energy loss is proportional
to 1/ξ . The ﬁnal state particles are emitted in the forward directions. For the
LHC running with β (cid:63) = 0.55 m it is impossible to register the elastically scattered
protons with the help of the AFP stations. Therefore, the signal signature is deﬁned
as the two-particle ﬁnal state with a photon registered in the ZDC and the scattered
proton in the AFP located in the photon hemisphere. Moreover, their reconstructed
energies have to fulﬁll relation (1). The energy range of the scattered proton, and
hence also of the photon, is deﬁned by the machine optics and location of the AFP
detectors.

3The pseudorapidity of a particle is deﬁned as η = −lntanΘ/2, where Θ is the polar angle of a

particle.

6

Figure 3: The distribution of the radiating proton relative energy loss, ξ , versus its
transverse momentum, pT .

4 Analysis
4.1 Signal
A sample of the signal events was generated using the Monte Carlo generator based
on the GenEx MC [14] which was devised to describe the production of the low
multiplicity exclusive states. The GenEx extension implements the calculations
of [6]. A sample of 3 000 000 events with the photon energy between 100 GeV
and 1500 GeV was generated. The calculated cross-section within this range is
1.7514± 0.0006 µb.

The ﬁnal state particles were transported through the LHC lattice. The transport
of the protons was performed using the parameterisation [11] of the MAD-X [15]
results. The differences between the MAD-X and the parameterisation results are
much smaller than the spatial resolutions of the experimental apparatus. In the cal-
culations the beam and interaction vertex properties were taken into account. One
should note that the beam chamber geometry is of negligible importance owing to
the low values of the transverse momenta of the ﬁnal state particles. The ZDC re-
sponse to the incident photon was calculated using the resolution mentioned above.
Also, the photon impact position was smeared according to the reported spatial res-
olution of the device. The energy of the proton reaching the AFP was smeared with
the energy unfolding resolution.

The event selection depends on the machine optics and on the apparatus con-

7

ﬁguration. Speaking in general terms, the signal event is deﬁned by the following
requirements:

• presence of a photon with the energy reconstructed in the ZDC, Eγ,ZDC,
• presence, in the photon hemisphere, of a proton with the energy E(cid:48)
AFP,
• lack of the proton signal in the other hemisphere.

4.2 Simulation of Background Processes
In the background inﬂuence study events producing the signal-like signature were
considered. This means that the central detector should not register any particle
and there should be an electromagnetic energy deposit in the ZDC and a proton
registered in the AFP located in the photon hemisphere. Therefore, an event was
rejected from the analysis if it satisﬁed at least one of the following requirements:
• presence of a charged particle with the transverse momentum pT > 1 GeV

and |η| < 2.5 – the inner tracker veto;

• presence of a particle with energy E > 1 GeV and |η| < 4.8 – the calorimeter

veto,

• presence of a neutral hadron with the energy reconstructed in any ZDC

greater than 30 GeV,

• the electromagnetic energy reconstructed in the ZDC belonging to the non-

signal hemisphere larger than 30 GeV.

The ﬁrst two selection cuts efﬁciently reject non-diffractive and high-mass diffrac-
tive processes, while the other two play important an role in the reduction of the
double diffraction contribution.

The background processes were generated using PYTHIA 8 Monte Carlo [16].
The generated sample includes single and double diffractive dissociation4. The
PYTHIA reported cross-section is 21.4 mb. A sample of 109 events was generated.
These events underwent the simulation and reconstruction procedures as described
in Sec. 4.1.
It was checked with PYTHIA 8 that the dominating source of the
background events is the process:

p + p → p + π0 + p.

4It was checked with Pythia that the non-diffractive processes contribution to the background

after the ﬁnal selection is less than 0.5(cid:104) of the diffractive one.

8

The events were checked for the presence of a single photon within the ZDC ac-
ceptance. For each photon within the ZDC acceptance its reconstructed position
was calculated assuming the ZDC spatial resolution. The events containing two or
more photons were removed from the analysis if the maximum distance between
their impact positions was larger than 6 mm. One should note that the distance
between the photons emerging from the π0 decay at the ZDC face is not smaller
than 5 mm in the considered energy range and which is a consequence of the π0
mass.

4.3 Optimisation of the Signal/Background Ratio
To simulate the measurement the following assumptions were used:

• energy of a photon reconstructed in the ZDC, Eγ,ZDC, within the range 130

GeV to 1500 GeV,

• in the photon hemisphere a proton with the energy E(cid:48)

AFP corresponding to

ξ > 0.02 at

√
s = 13 TeV.

For both signal and background samples, the distributions of ∆E = Ebeam −

Eγ,ZDC − E(cid:48)

AFP, were constructed. They are shown in Fig. 4.

The distributions have very different shapes. The signal one is peaked at the
beam energy and its width, σE = 26 GeV. The distribution constructed using the
background events has a non-gaussian shape with long asymmetric tails. Also. its
maximum is shifted from the beam energy value. Therefore the requirement of the
energy conservation:

|Ebeam − Eγ,ZDC − E(cid:48)

AFP| < 3· σE,

(2)

efﬁciently rejects the background.
The above condition leads to the following visible cross-sections: σsig,vis ≈
1.31 µb for the signal and σbckg,vis ≈ 1.88 µb for the background. In the follow-
ing, further improvement of the signal to background ratio is attempted. This was
performed using features of the signal and background ﬁnal state particles. At the
ﬁrst step the differences in the distributions of the photon polar angle were studied.
To quantify them the distributions of the photon impact position on the ZDC face
were investigated for the signal and background samples.

In particular, the distributions of the distance, R, measured at the ZDC face,
between the photon impact point and the linearly extrapolated position of the beam
following from the beam crossing angle – c.f. Table 1 were studied. These dis-
tributions are shown in Fig. 5 for events passing the above outlined selections.
The signal distribution has a clear maximum located at about 14 mm and a quickly

9

Figure 4: The distribution of ∆E = Ebeam−Eγ,ZDC−E(cid:48)
event sample, the blue line - the background sample (colour on-line).

AFP. The red line - the signal

falling tail. The distribution constructed for the background events increases with
increasing value of the distance, reaches an approximate plateau for the distance
of about 34 mm and for values larger than about 46 mm it quickly decreases. This
difference will serve as an efﬁcient background discrimination tool.

Both distributions were converted to the distributions of the probability that the

discussed distance is smaller than a certain value and are shown in Fig. 6.

Inspection of Fig. 6 shows that the requirement that the distance being smaller
than 30 mm leaves about 85% percent of the accepted signal events and rejects
about 75% of the background events. Imposing such a cut leads to the ﬁnal visible
cross-sections of 1.12 µb and 394 nb for the signal and the background, respec-
tively.

The above mentioned cross-section values are subject to a change due to the
geometry and the position of the AFP detector with respect to the proton beam.
As was already, mentioned the AFP acceptance crucially depends on the distance
between the beam and the active edge of the detector. Typically this distance is set
to the multiple of the transverse size of the beam, σ, at the detector location (see
Table 1). In the calculations this distance was set to 10σ ,15σ ,20σ and 25σ. Table

10

Figure 5: The distribution of the distance, R, between the reconstructed photon
impact point at the ZDC and the beam projection. The red line - the signal event
sample, the blue line - the background sample (colour on-line).

2 lists the visible cross-sections as a function of the mentioned distances for the
signal and background samples. Also, the signal to background ratio is given in
the table.

The geometrical acceptance of the AFP system reduces the visible cross-section
to about 1 µb in the case of the closest approach of the detector to the beam. The
visible cross-section for the signal decreases with increasing distance between the
active detector edge and the beam while that for the background is approximately
independent the detector position within the considered range of distances. These
trends result in the decreasing value of the signal to background ratio from about 3
for the distance of 10σ to about 2 for 30σ

4.4 Results
The signal visible cross-section predicts that the rate of the diffractive bremsstrah-
lung events within the considered phase space varies between 0.1 Hz to about
100 Hz for the instantaneous luminosity increasing from 1029 cm−2s−1 to 1032
cm−2s−1 assuming that the luminosity is evenly distributed among all bunches.

11

Figure 6: The cumulative distribution of the probability that the distance, R, be-
tween the reconstructed photon impact point at the ZDC and the beam projection
is smaller than a certain value. The red line - the signal event sample, the blue line
- the background sample (colour on-line).

Moreover, the above results were obtained with an implicit assumption of a sin-
gle interaction per bunch crossing. In reality, at the LHC running with large in-
stantaneous luminosity, several pp interactions per bunch crossing can happen.
Therefore, the visible cross-sections have to be multiplied by the probability of
no pp interactions to calculate the pile-up-free rate. The reduction factor depends
on the machine delivered luminosity and is negligible at luminosities below 1030
cm−2s−1, reaches the value of about 0.9 for luminosity of 1031 cm−2s−1, the value
of about 0.4 for 1032 cm−2s−1 and for larger instantaneous luminosities rapidly
decreases.
The visible cross-section implies the collection of the diffractive bremsstrahlung
samples of a few thousand to several thousand events in a 10-hour long LHC run.
It should be noted that a similar study was performed for pp scattering at RHIC
√
energies [17] using the STAR apparatus. Yet, another study was performed also at
s = 10 TeV and for the β (cid:63) = 90 m [3] for the TOTEM. In contrast to the work
presented above the double tagged events were considered. The authors concluded
that the photons can be used to tag the elastic events which in turn can be used to

12

Table 2: The visible cross-sections in nb for the signal and background for different
distances of the detector active part and the beam.

Signal
cross-section [nb]
1047
915
745
614
497

Background
cross-section [nb]
280
291
299
298
290

distance
10σ
15σ
20σ
25σ
30σ

S/B ratio

3.5
3.1
2.5
2.1
1.8

measure the pT dependence of the elastic cross-section as well as the ratio of the
elastic to total cross-section.

5 Summary and Conclusions

Feasibility studies of the diffractive bremsstrahlung measurement at the centre of
mass energy of 13 TeV at the LHC were performed. The expected visible cross-
section depends on the distance between the detector and the beam. It decreases
with increasing distance from about 1 µb (separation of 10σ of the beam) to about
500 nb for 30σ. The visible cross-section for the background is approximately
constant. The expected rates allow the collection of large event samples during a
10-hour long LHC run with moderate instantaneous luminosity.

Further optimisation of the analysis cuts has to take into account actual running

conditions during the data taking period.

6 Acknowledgements

We are very much indebted to P. Lebiedowicz and A. Szczurek for many stimu-
lating discussions. This work was supported in part by Polish National Science
Centre grant UMO-2012/05/B/ST2/02480.

References

[1] Glasgov-Shefﬁeld-DNPL Collab., T. A. Amstrong et al., Total Hadronic Cross
Section of γ Rays in Hydrogen in the Energy Range 0.265-GeV to 4.215-GeV,
Phys. Rev. D5 (1972) 1640;

13

[2] J. Andruszkow et al., Luminosity measurement in the ZEUS experiment, Acta.

Phys. Pol. B32 (2001) 2025,
L. Adamczyk et al., Measurement of the luminosity in the ZEUS experiment
at HERA II, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A744 (2014) 80.

[3] V. A. Khoze, J. W. Lämsä, R. Orava, M. G. Ryskin, Forward Physics at the
LHC: Detecting Elastic pp Scattering by Radiative Photons, JINST 6 (2011)
P01005.

[4] V. A. Khoze, A. D. Martin, R. Orava, M. G. Ryskin. Luminosity measuring

processes at the LHC, Eur. Phys. J C19 (2001) 313.

[5] M. W. Krasny, J. Chwastowski and K. Słowikowski, Luminosity measurement
method for LHC: The theoretical precision and the experimental challenges,
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A584 (2008) 42.

[6] P. Lebiedowicz and A. Szczurek, Exclusive diffractive photon bremsstrahlung

at the LHC, Phys. Rev. D87 (2013) 114013.

[7] A. Donnachie and P. V. Landshoff, Phys. Lett. B296 (1992) 227.

[8] ATLAS Collaboration, The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN Large Hadron

Collider, JINST 3 (2008) S08003.

[9] ATLAS Collaboration, Zero Degree Calorimeters for ATLAS, CERN-LHCC-

2007-001 (2007).

[10] ATLAS Collaboration, Technical Design Report for the ATLAS Forward Pro-

ton Detector, CERN-LHCC-201-009. ATLAS-TDR-024.

[11] R. Staszewski and J. Chwastowski, Transport Simulation and Diffractive

Event Reconstruction at the LHC, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A609 (2009) 136.

[12] M. Trzebi´nski, Machine Optics Studies for the LHC Measurements, Proc.

SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 9290, 929026 (2014).

[13] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics; 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1999.

[14] R. Kycia, J. Turnau, R. Staszewski and J. Chwastowski, GenEx: A sim-
ple generator structure for exclusive processes in high energy collisions,
arXiv:1411.6035 [hep-ph].

[15] F. Schmidt, Mad-X User’s Guide, CERN 2005,

BE/ABP Accelerator Physics Group: http://mad.web.cern.ch/mad/.

14

[16] T. Sjöstrand et al., An Introduction to PYTHIA 8.2, Comput. Phys. Commun.

191 (2015) 159,
T. Sjöstrand, S. Mrenna and P. Skands, PYTHIA 6.4 Physics and Manual,
JHEP05 (2006) 026.

[17] J. Chwastowski, Ł. Fulek, R. Kycia, R. Sikora, J. Turnau, A. Cyz and B. Paw-
lik, Feasibility Studies of Exclusive Diffractive Bremsstrahlung Measurement
at RHIC Energies, Acta Phys. Polon. B 46, (2015) 1979.

15

