6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
4
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

From plane waves to local Gaussians for the simulation of correlated periodic
systems

George H. Booth,1, a) Theodoros Tsatsoulis,2 Garnet Kin-Lic Chan,3 and Andreas Gr¨uneis2, b)
1)Department of Physics, King’s College London, Strand, London, WC2R 2LS,
UK
2)Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstraße 1, 70569 Stuttgart,
Germany
3)Department of Chemistry, Frick Laboratory, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544,
USA

We present a simple, robust and black-box approach to the implementation and use of local, periodic, atom-
centered Gaussian basis functions within a plane wave code, in a computationally eﬃcient manner. The
procedure outlined is based on the representation of the Gaussians within a ﬁnite bandwidth by their under-
lying plane wave coeﬃcients. The core region is handled within the projected augment wave framework, by
pseudizing the Gaussian functions within a cut-oﬀ radius around each nucleus, smoothing the functions so that
they are faithfully represented by a plane wave basis with only moderate kinetic energy cutoﬀ. To mitigate
the eﬀects of the basis set superposition error and incompleteness at the mean-ﬁeld level introduced by the
Gaussian basis, we also propose a hybrid approach, whereby the complete occupied space is ﬁrst converged
within a large plane wave basis, and the Gaussian basis used to construct a complementary virtual space for
the application of correlated methods. We demonstrate that these pseudized Gaussians yield compact and
systematically improvable spaces with an accuracy comparable to their non-pseudized Gaussian counterparts.
A key advantage of the described method is its ability to eﬃciently capture and describe electronic correlation
eﬀects of weakly bound and low-dimensional systems, where plane waves are not suﬃciently compact or able
to be truncated without unphysical artifacts. We investigate the accuracy of the pseudized Gaussians for
the water dimer interaction, neon solid and water adsorption on a LiH surface, at the level of second-order
Møller–Plesset perturbation theory.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the development of ﬁrst principles electronic struc-
ture methods for extended systems, a huge amount of
research eﬀort is expended exploring diﬀerent function
spaces in which to expand the electronic wavefunctions.
This is a critical design choice since the rate of conver-
gence of the desired properties of the system with respect
to the size of this function space will substantially impact
the computational cost and feasibility of calculations, and
go a long way to determining the utility of the approach.
In this paper, we will consider a simple, robust protocol
for building a periodic Gaussian basis from an underlying
traditional plane-wave expansion. In particular, we focus
on the ability to converge the virtual manifold of states,
required for correlated, post-mean-ﬁeld calculations, such
as the Random Phase Approximation (RPA), GW the-
ory, Møller-Plesset theory (MP2), coupled-cluster the-
ory, as well as multi-conﬁgurational strong correlation
approaches1. The computational scaling of these meth-
ods with the number of virtual states grows between
quadratically and exponentially, and therefore the abil-
ity to span the relevant parts of this space with as few
functions as possible becomes a critical design decision
in the implementation of periodic correlated methods.

From the perspective of the paradigmatic uniform elec-

a)Electronic mail: george.booth@kcl.ac.uk
b)Electronic mail: a.grueneis@fkf.mpg.de

tron gas, plane waves are the natural choice of basis to
expand both one-electron and many-electron wavefunc-
tion quantities2–5. These plane waves are eigenfunctions
of the kinetic energy operator, and naturally fulﬁl the pe-
riodicity of the computational cell. In realistic ab initio
calculations, these plane waves also have a number of ap-
pealing features. They are independent of the molecular
makeup of the simulation cell, and instead only depend
on the size and geometry of the cell. In addition, a single
cutoﬀ parameter dictating the upper energy scale of the
included plane waves (and hence the resolution of the re-
sultant wavefunctions) is used to systematically expand
the plane wave basis to completeness, in a fashion free
from basis-set superposition error (BSSE)6,7.

However, there are some drawbacks to plane wave ex-
pansions. Since they make no reference to the nature
of the atomic environment, they have equal basis cover-
age throughout the cell. This can lead to a great deal
of wasted computational eﬀort when studying defects,
surfaces or lower-dimensional systems. This is due to the
necessity for large amounts of vacuum in the cells to min-
imize the eﬀect of spurious periodic images, which results
in large, unwieldy plane wave expansions to converge rel-
evant properties8. Even in bulk systems, the dominant
electron density will generally be clustered around the
atomic sites, and making use of this fact with atom-
centered functions can certainly improve basis set con-
vergence.

For correlated methods, the steeper scaling compared
to mean-ﬁeld methods means that the speed of conver-
gence with respect to number of basis functions is even

more critical. Rather than using plane waves directly
for the virtual space,
it is more common to truncate
the prior mean-ﬁeld virtual manifold on an energetic cri-
teria to improve the convergence to the complete basis
set9,10. However, this virtual manifold is not inherently
physical, and its somewhat arbitrary truncation there-
fore does not necessarily provide a good basis in which
to expand the correlated wavefunction. Truncating based
on an energetic criteria (now on the mean-ﬁeld energy
rather than kinetic energy as for plane waves) does not
necessarily yield fast convergence, while issues such as
band-crossings which can occur as unit cells are distorted
or enlarged can yield discontinuities in potential energy
surfaces and equations of state. Furthermore, consistent
truncations of the virtual bandstructure when compar-
ing fundamentally diﬀerent systems, such as a defective
and pristine lattice structure, are close to impossible to
achieve, and therefore still generally rely on convergence
to costly, near-complete basis sets for meaningful com-
parisons. Attempts to truncate virtual single-particle or-
bital expansions using other criteria, such as occupation
numbers from other levels of theory, have had some suc-
cess, but can often be expensive to carry out8.

An alternative representation to plane wave expansions
are local atom-centered basis sets. This mirrors the du-
ality between basis representations of lattice models such
as the Hubbard model, where the local ‘site’ degrees of
freedom contrast with that of the discrete k-space, plane
wave representation, commonly used in the uniform elec-
tron gas. These local functions now correspond to a basis
with a local, atomistic description of the simulation cell.
Futhermore, their use allows for simple extraction of lo-
cal descriptors, such as atomic electron numbers, spin
density or projected densities of states, without requir-
ing post-processing localization steps towards Wannier,
or similar, functions11,12. While these local functions
can take many forms, from Muﬃn-tin orbitals13–15, to
wavelets16–18 or numerical atomic orbitals19,20, in this
manuscript we consider the use of periodic Gaussian basis
sets, and analyse their convergence for correlated levels
of theory.

While Gaussian basis sets can potentially take many
diﬀerent parameterizations, their widespread use within
the ﬁeld of quantum chemistry has meant that many tab-
ulated basis sets of increasing size and ﬂexibility are read-
ily available21,22. The Gaussian orbitals are optimized to
approximate the natural orbitals of the free atom and its
common ions, often at correlated levels of theory. Or-
bitals beyond the core and valence shells are included
to account for appropriate polarization and distortion of
the atomic wavefunctions in bonding environments, and
to provide a description of correlation eﬀects. Basis sets
are commonly arranged in hierarchies so that they can
be systematically expanded to allow for consistent and (if
necessary) extrapolatable convergence. In periodic sys-
tems, as the atomic-like Gaussian orbitals come together
to form bands, they will split about the Fermi level to
describe the important low energy regions of the space,

2

as well as retaining a consistent, local description of the
one-electron wavefunctions, even for low-dimensional sys-
tems, or as cells change shape or atoms move. The use
of Gaussian-type orbitals in periodic electronic structure
is not new to this work, with several other codes employ-
ing their use23–28. The local nature of these functions
and ‘nearsightedness’ of the interactions is often used for
reduced scaling techniques, including in diagonalization
steps, or construction of Coulomb and exchange interac-
tions in order to approach linear scaling mean-ﬁeld treat-
ments29–32, and can also be extended to local treatment
of correlation25,33.

It should be noted that in post-mean-ﬁeld correlated
methods (including those based around the explicitly
screened Coulomb interaction) the ultimate rate deter-
mining scaling in the convergence of correlated proper-
ties with respect to the one-electron basis set size is the
description of the short-range Coulomb hole and non-
analytic cusp condition at the coalescence point of two
particles34,35.
It has been shown that this scaling be-
haviour is the same for both Gaussian, as well as plane
wave expansions of the orbital space36,37. However, the
absolute convergence in diﬀerent basis sets can be very
diﬀerent, as the decay of the Coulomb hole depends sen-
sitively on the electron density, as well as the ﬂexibil-
ity of the basis at the coalescence points. Furthermore,
the absolute one-electron basis set incompleteness (which
is both a feature of the correlated, as well as mean-
ﬁeld wavefunctions), is also very much dependent on the
speciﬁcs of the primitive orbital expansion38.

In this paper, we detail an implementation of a
straightforward approach for the use of a periodic Gaus-
sian basis (or indeed any numerical atom-centered func-
tions) within a code set up for more traditional plane
wave description of the wavefunction. We also consider
changes to deal with core electrons when they are not ex-
plicitly considered, as is the case in the VASP code within
the Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) framework where
this work is implemented. We then apply correlated lev-
els of theory to a number of systems, demonstrating that
the consistent level of truncation as aﬀorded by the Gaus-
sian basis set expansions leads to a rapidly convergent
and extrapolatable virtual space for the calculations. Ex-
tensive comparison is made to all-electron molecular cal-
culations, giving conﬁdence in the applicability of the
functions for both strongly and weakly interacting sys-
tems.

For larger-scale applications, we propose and explore
an eﬃcient hybrid approach. In this approach, the oc-
cupied orbitals are converged ﬁrst within a large primi-
tive plane wave expansion, rendering the occupied space
and hence Hartree–Fock energy and its contributions to
properties essentially complete. A virtual basis is then
included for the correlation treatment comprised of the
complementary set of orbitals constructed by projecting
the occupied orbitals out of the Gaussian basis set. This
dual approach removes basis incompleteness of the occu-
pied one-electron wavefunctions and properties and thus

Rl (r)

~
Rl (r)

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

PS

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

Ψ~

G

(r)= 1

Σ
Ω CGe
WAVECAR file

FT

Gi  r

VASP

HF, MP2, RPA, ...

FIG. 1. Schematic illustration of the workﬂow. A Gaussian
basis set is represented on a radial grid (left upper panel).
We employ a pseudization strategy (PS) to allow the core to
be more eﬃciently represented by its Fourier coeﬃcients by
calculating the corresponding pseudized basis function (right
upper panel). In the following step we Fourier transform (FT)
the pseudized Gausssian-type orbital (PGTO) to the plane
wave basis (left bottom panel). This is then used for the
various electronic structure methods ranging from Hartree–
Fock (HF) to post-HF theories.

substantially ameliorates the issue of basis-set superpo-
sition error, which now only manifests through the sub-
sequent correlation treatment. In addition, it retains the
beneﬁts of the compact, consistent virtual space aﬀorded
by the atom-centered Gaussians. We note that related
occupied projected Gaussian bases (projected atomic or-
bitals39) are commonly used in molecular Gaussian basis
codes to exploit the locality of correlation, however we
do not rely on this locality here, beyond its manifesta-
tion in the general compactness of the full set of virtual
orbitals, as discussed above. This is applied to the MP2
contributions to the cohesive energy of the Neon solid,
where the weak binding means that basis set incomplete-
ness manifests as large relative errors. Also studied is
the absorption of a water molecule onto a Lithium Hy-
dride crystal surface, where the low-dimensionality of the
system means that the Gaussian virtual space eﬃciently
spans the correlated wavefunction, and allows for rapid
convergence of extrapolations which agree well with ref-
erence results.

II. CONSTRUCTION OF GAUSSIAN BASIS

This section outlines the procedures employed to trans-
form a speciﬁed contracted Gaussian basis set into one
which can be used with a plane wave solid state code
within the framework of the projector augmented wave
method. This involves ﬁrst ‘pseudizing’ the sharply
peaked core part of the basis, designed to capture the
nuclear cusp within all-electron calculations, but which
is unnecessary in this context. The resulting smoother
function is then represented through its plane wave coef-

3

ﬁcients. Figure 1 outlines the individual steps schemati-
cally.

1. Gaussian basis functions

The Gaussian basis set is composed of atom-centered
functions (GTOs) that can be decomposed into a radial
and angular parts such that an angular momentum func-
tion (m, l) for a given atom positioned at R can be given
by

Gm,l,R(r) = Rl(|r − R|)Yl,m(Θ, φ),

(1)

where Ylm(Θ, φ) is a spherical harmonic and r, Θ, φ cor-
respond to spherical coordinates. The radial function
Rl(|r − R|) is expanded using Gaussian functions such
that

Rl(|r − R|) = |r − R|lXp

cpA(l, αp)e−αp|r−R|2

,

(2)

where A(l, αp) is a normalization constant of the Gaus-
sian primitives.
cp are contraction coeﬃcients for the
primitive Gaussian functions with exponent αp.

2. The PAW method

The projector augmented wave (PAW) method was in-
troduced by Bl¨ochl40. Its close relationship to the ultra-
soft pseudopotentials method of Vanderbilt was shown
by Kresse and Joubert41, where further details can be
found, while here we brieﬂy recap the approach. In the
PAW method, the orbitals (|ψni) are derived from the
pseudo orbitals (| ˜ψni) by means of a linear transforma-
tion

|ψni = | ˜ψni +Xi

(|ϕii − | ˜ϕii)D˜pi| ˜ψnE

(3)

The index n, labeling the orbitals ψ, is understood
to be shorthand for the band index and the Bloch wave
vector kn, while the index i is a shorthand for the atomic
site Ri, the angular momentum quantum numbers li and
mi, and an additional index ǫi denoting the linearization
energy. The wave vector is conventionally chosen to lie
within the ﬁrst Brillouin zone. The pseudo orbitals are
the variational quantities of the PAW method and are
expanded in reciprocal space using plane waves,

hr| ˜Ψni =

1

√Ω XG

C n

Gei(kn+G)r

(4)

The all-electron partial waves ϕi are the solution to the
radial Schr¨odinger equation for the non-spin-polarized
reference atom at speciﬁc energies ǫi and speciﬁc angular
momenta li. The pseudo-partial waves ˜ϕi, are equiva-
lent to the all-electron partial waves outside a core ra-
dius rc and match continuously onto ϕi inside the core

radius. The partial waves ϕi and ˜ϕi are represented on
radial logarithmic grids, multiplied with spherical har-
monics. The projector functions ˜pi are constructed in
such a way that they are dual to the pseudo partial waves,
i.e., h˜pi| ˜ϕji = δij. The pseudized partial waves ˜ϕi are ob-
tained by pseudizing the all-electron partial waves ϕi for
a given core radius rc

42.

3. Pseudized Gaussians

In this work we seek to employ Gaussian basis sets us-
ing a plane wave code. Fourier components of strongly lo-
calized real space orbitals decay very slowly, which man-
ifests as a slow convergence of the orbitals with respect
to the underlying plane wave energy cutoﬀ. This cutoﬀ
energy dictates the size of the plane wave basis employed
in Eq. 4. The slow convergence of the orbitals with re-
spect to this cutoﬀ is mainly due to sharp features of the
Gaussian-type orbitals (GTOs) resulting from the ﬁtting
of the non-analytic cusp behaviour at the nuclear coa-
lescence point, which in non-relativistic quantum theory
exhibits a derivative discontinuity in the wavefunction.
However, the plane-wave basis we employ is augmented
within the projector augmented wave framework, which
includes a description of the atomic core region of each
atom. This augmentation largely resolves these sharply
varying parts of the wavefunction.

To this end we ‘pseudize’ the GTO functions deﬁned
in Eq. 2, which smooths the core region of each function,
deﬁned up to a pseudization radius from the nucleus, rc.
This is done in a way consistent with the symmetry and
norm of the orbitals, and results in a more rapidly con-
vergent set of Fourier components representing pseudized
GTOs (PGTOs). The employed pseudization strategy
mirrors the work of Kresse et al in the construction of
pseudized partial waves42 for pseudopotentials. The core
of the pseudized radial Gaussian basis functions are ex-
panded in three spherical Bessel functions such that

˜Rl(r) =

3

Xi=1

αirjl(qir)

(5)

with qi chosen such that the value of the function, as well
as logarithmic derivatives match at the cutoﬀ radius,

∂
∂r

[lnRl(r)] |r=rc =

∂
∂r

[ln(rjl(qir))]|r=rc .

(6)

Moreover, we require norm conservation of the PGTO
such that

Z rc

0

˜Rl(r)2dr = Z rc

0

Rl(r)2dr.

(7)

We note that for r ≥ rc the following condition holds
Rl(r) = ˜Rl(r). We choose the pseudization radius such
that it is identical to the cutoﬀ radius used by the pro-
jectors ˜pi in the PAW method. In this manner we ensure

4

Pseudized orbitals
No pseudization

Plane wave cutoff / eV

Pseudized orbitals
No pseudization

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Plane wave cutoff / eV

10

8

6

4

2

)
l
l

e
c
/
V
e
(
 
F
H
E
 
l
a
t
o
t
 
n
i
 
r
o
r
r
E

0.40
0

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

)
l
l

e
c
/
V
e
(
 

.
r
r
o
c
E
 

2
P
M
 
n
i
 
r
o
r
r
E

0.00

300

FIG. 2.
The eﬀect of pseudization on the convergence of
Gaussian orbitals as plane waves, for a 3×3×3 simulation
cell of diamond. The upper plot shows the diﬀerence be-
tween the Hartree–Fock total energy for the pseudized and
non-pseudized STO-3G Gaussian orbital basis. This is cal-
culated as the diﬀerence between a plane wave expansion of
the orbitals truncated at a given energy and the ‘complete’
(1000eV cutoﬀ) description of the same orbital space. Note
that the 1000eV cutoﬀ energies are not the same, since the
act of pseudization slightly alters the orbitals. The lower plot
shows the convergence of the MP2 correlation energy for the
same system. The 1s orbitals are removed from the STO-3G
atomic basis on each atom, since the 1s electrons are replaced
by a pseudopotential, with the orbitals represented within the
PAW functions.

that that core region of the pseudized Gaussians is aug-
mented with additional terms that capture the oscillatory
and sharp features of the one-electron wavefunctions in
this region.

A demonstration of the importance of the pseudization
of the atomic Gaussian functions is given in Fig. 2, where
the convergence of the total and correlation energies of
a 3 × 3 × 3 cell of diamond is considered, demonstrat-
ing that pseudization of the atomic functions is essential
to obtain rapidly convergent properties with the size of
the underlying plane wave basis. While the size of this
plane wave basis is generally insigniﬁcant when consid-
ering the cost of the correlated treatment in the system,
numerical and computational diﬃculties can arise if the
plane wave cutoﬀ is too large, and therefore the pseudiza-
tion is necessary when aiming to converge results for a
given atomic basis set. We can also consider the conver-
gence of static properties in a larger Gaussian basis as
the underlying plane wave basis which represents these
functions increases, which will depend on the accuracy of
relative energies across a range of cell geometries. This is
shown in Fig. 3, demonstrating that cutoﬀs of 750eV are
suﬃcient to saturate the representation of the pseudized
Gaussian orbitals, and to fully converge the equation of

77.0

3

0
a
 
/
 
e
m
u
o
V

l

 
l
l

 

e
C
m
u
i
r
b

i
l
i

u
q
E

a
P
G

l

 
/
 
s
u
u
d
o
m
 
k
u
B

l

76.5

76.0

75.5

75.0

74.5

74.0

73.5

600

550

500

450

400

350

300

300

Bulk modulus

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Plane wave cutoff / eV

FIG. 3. Convergence of the equilibrium cell volume (upper
plot) and bulk modulus (lower plot) with increasing plane
wave cutoﬀ, as obtained from the equation of state of a 3×3×3
cell of diamond. This equation of state was calculated at the
MP2 level of theory in a cc-pVDZ pseudized Gaussian basis
set, and ﬁt to a Birch-Murnaghan form for 14 cell volumes at
each plane wave truncation43.

state for the system.

4. Virtual pseudized Gaussian basis

In instances where the local nature of the basis as
Gaussians is not speciﬁcally required in the mean-ﬁeld
calculation, it can be highly beneﬁcial to pursue a hybrid
approach to the basis construction for correlated calcu-
lations. In this, the relatively cheap mean-ﬁeld part of
the calculation can be performed with a plane wave basis,
where convergence to the complete basis (e.g. to 1meV in
energies) can be achieved using aﬀordable energy cutoﬀs,
and without the basis set linear-dependence that can be
a problem in larger Gaussian basis sets. Once converged,
this yields close to the optimal occupied orbitals, mean-
ﬁeld (Hartree–Fock) energy and wavefunction, essentially
free from basis set incompleteness or superposition errors.
This is advantageous because the Gaussian basis will not
in general span the full occupied orbital space, due to the
polarization of the orbitals due to the environment.

The large expansion of virtual orbitals as plane waves
or virtual canonical orbitals is then avoided by repre-
senting the virtual space as an expansion of pseudized
Gaussian basis functions, after having projected out the
component of the (complete) occupied space from the
Gaussian basis. This ensures that the full ﬂexibility of
the pseudized Gaussian basis is spanned, in addition to
the complete occupied space. Since all orbitals are ulti-
mately expressed by their Fourier components, this pro-
jection is trivially achieved, and the virtual orbital space

Equilibrium cell volume

{|ψαi} can be constructed as
|ψαi = |Gαi −Xi

|ψiihψi|Gαi

5

(8)

where |Gαi is the Gaussian basis, and |ψii represents
the complete space of occupied orbitals expressed in the
plane wave basis. If the norm of any virtual orbital is be-
low a threshold value after this projection, then it is re-
moved from the calculation, while the rest are orthonor-
malized and constitute the virtual basis for the calcu-
lation. The virtual space is subsequently canonicalized
before use in post-mean-ﬁeld methods, with no further
mixing between occupied and virtual states possible. It
is also possible for the ‘occupied’ atomic orbitals of the
original contracted Gaussian basis to be identiﬁed and
removed entirely from the basis, as they are largely re-
dundant, to leave an overall basis the same size as the
original, unmodiﬁed Gaussian basis, but still complete in
all mean-ﬁeld orbitals and properties.

The beneﬁts of this basis construction are signiﬁcant,
with basis set incompleteness and superposition error
only remaining in the correlated treatment of the wave-
function, which is readily extrapolatable within the em-
ployed correlation-consistent basis sets. A drawback of
the above construction is that the occupied space is
no longer represented within an underlying local basis,
which may be desirable for the exploitation of locality
approximations in quantum cluster methods. Finding a
local representation would then require further localiza-
tion steps which would be unnecessary if the underlying
basis was already local. The use of Gaussian basis sets
for local, cluster approximations will be explored in the
future. We now turn to some applications to demon-
strate the performance of the pseudized Gaussian basis
compared to all-electron molecular calculations, before a
study of more challenging systems.

III. RESULTS

A. Comparison to molecular systems

1. He in a pseudized aug-cc-pVTZ basis set

In order to quantify the eﬀect of the pseudization, and
to assess the ﬁdelity of the representation of the Gaus-
sian type orbitals, we ﬁrst compare to gas phase molecu-
lar systems, where results within the same basis obtained
from a molecular Gaussian basis code can be compared to
our periodic implementation in the limit of a large simula-
tion box. Here we use PSI444 as the molecular code while
all pseudized GTO calculations were performed using
VASP. The ﬁrst investigation assesses the Hartree–Fock
one-electron energies of a He atom in a 20×20×20 ˚A3 cu-
bic box. The He atom in the aug-cc-pvtz basis set con-
stitutes a test case because it is free of frozen core states
that might introduce an additional source of discrepancy

]

V
e

[
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

 
l

a

t
i

b
r
o
 
k
c
o
F
-
e
e
r
t
r
a
H
d
e
n
g

 

i
l

A

250

200

150

100

50

0

]

V
e

[
 

E
∆

 

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

0

5

10

15

20

25

AE aug-cc-pvtz
300 eV
600 eV
900 eV

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Hartree-Fock orbital number

FIG. 4. Hartree–Fock (HF) one-electron energies retrieved as
a function of the orbital number for the He atom. The all-
electron (AE) HF orbital energies using the aug-cc-pVTZ ba-
sis set have been obtained using the PSI4 quantum chemistry
package. The HF plane wave calculations using VASP have
been performed in the same basis using a 20 ×20 ×20 ˚A3 cu-
bic box.

between the VASP pseudopotential and PSI4 all-electron
quantum chemistry results. For the sake of clarity we
will refer to the results obtained using the VASP code and
pseudized GTOs as PGTOs results, whereas the results
obtained using PSI4 will be referred to as GTOs results.
Figure 4 shows the Hartree–Fock (HF) one-electron en-
ergies calculated using 300 eV, 600 eV and 900 eV plane
wave cutoﬀ energies.
It can be seen that the HF one-
electron energies converge rapidly for both occupied and
virtual manifolds, even for the more high-lying states.
It should be noted that both the virtual and occupied
space was expressed in the underlying Gaussian basis in
this example, rather than using the technique detailed in
section II 4.

The order and degeneracy of the states agrees between
the two diﬀerent methods (PGTOs and GTOs). How-
ever, the inset in Figure 4 shows that the energy diﬀer-
ences between the PGTOs and GTOs contain outliers
corresponding to states 15 and 21-23, where the discrep-
ancy can become larger than 4 eV. We attribute this
to the diﬀerent form of the PGTOs and the GTOs in-
side the PAW sphere.
In this region the PGTOs are
pseudized and augmented with terms that depend on the
projectors, the all-electron partial waves and the pseudo
orbitals. However, we stress that the aim of this work
is not to achieve perfect agreement between PGTOs and
GTOs but rather to obtain a similar quality and basis set
convergence for correlated wave function calculations.

2. Water dimer

Having demonstrated that the PGTOs yield a similar
one-electron spectrum as the GTOs, as well as rapidly
convergent properties with plane wave cutoﬀ, we now

6

FIG. 5. Water dimer geometry.

TABLE I. Atomic positions for the water dimera (˚A).

O
O
H
H
H
H

x

-0.002
-0.002
0.090
0.898
-0.482
-0.482

y

1.517
-1.386
0.555
1.846
-1.723
-1.723

z

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.759
-0.759

a http://cccbdb.nist.gov/

turn to the discussion of the convergence of correlation
energy contributions to the binding energy in the water
dimer with basis size. Figure 5 and Table I show and
specify the employed water dimer structure. This case is
important because plane wave basis set calculations are
computationally very expensive for atomic and molecu-
lar systems, which usually require a large simulation box
with a lot of vacuum to minimize interactions between
periodic images, and are required for many formation or
cohesive energy calculations. As a result of the large box
size the number of plane wave basis functions becomes
very large regardless of the actual number of electrons
in the unit cell45. In this calculation we have employed
a 10×10×10 ˚A3 cubic box. The cutoﬀ energy was set
to 600 eV resulting in a basis set size consisting of more
than 30,000 plane waves, which would be impossible to
do at the level of MP2. However, the number of Gaussian
basis functions is smaller than 200 even for the pseudized
aug-cc-pVTZ basis set.

For this example (and subsequent applications in this
work), the complete occupied space of states was ﬁrst
calculated, and included within the basis to saturate the
Hartree–Fock wavefunction. The PGTO basis was there-
fore only used to span the complementary virtual space,
as described in Sec. II 4. We note that the MP2 results
for this system change by less than 3 meV when employ-
ing a 15 ×15 ×15 ˚A3 cubic box. This is unsurprising,
since even the most diﬀuse Oxygen functions in the aug-
cc-pVTZ basis have less than 0.001% of their integrated
radial density found more than 6˚A away from their nu-
clear origin. This locality of basis coverage is the domi-
nant factor in the compactness of the Gaussian basis for
this purpose compared to plane wave expansions.

Table II summarizes the obtained binding energies for
the water dimer on the level of HF and MP2 theory cal-
culated using the (pseudized) aug-cc-pVDZ and aug-cc-
pVTZ basis sets. Since the PGTOs are only used to span
the virtual orbitals, the PGTOs Hartree–Fock contribu-

TABLE II. Binding energy contributions for the water dimer
using HF and MP2 theory, comparing results from gas-phase
calculations in a full aug-cc-pVXZ basis, and our results
from a periodic system in a 10×10×10 ˚A3 cubic box, with
a pseudized basis. The (CP ) denotes that counterpoise cor-
rections have been included for basis set superposition error
in this basis. All units are in meV.

TABLE III. Binding energy contributions for the Nitrogen
dimer using HF and MP2 theory, for all-electron, gas-phase
GTO results, and our PGTO implementation. The ﬁrst col-
umn deﬁnes the type of aug-cc-pVXZ basis set employed.
(CP ) denotes that the results have been corrected for basis
set superposition error via counterpoise correction. All units
are in eV.

PGTOs

GTOs

PGTOs

GTOs

7

Basis
HF MP2 corr. MP2 HF MP2 corr. MP2
219
aVDZ
142
aVTZ
142
234
195
aVDZ (CP) 142
aVTZ (CP) 142
195

156
146
151
144

197
208
183
195

63
88
44
51

56
66
41
53

4.153
4.771

HF MP2 corr. MP2 HF MP2 corr. MP2
Basis
9.089
5.094
aVDZ
5.094
aVTZ
10.089
10.207
aVQZ
5.094
aVDZ (CP) 5.094
8.879
aVTZ (CP) 5.094
9.764
aVQZ (CP) 5.094
10.097

9.247 4.754
9.864 5.043
5.096
9.038 4.722
9.768 5.033
5.094

4.335
5.046
5.111
4.157
4.731
5.004

3.944
4.674

-

-

-

-

tion to the binding energies are independent of the basis
set size, since these are necessarily complete and free of
basis set errors. This also renders the occupied space
and HF contribution free of basis set superposition error,
as shown by the lack of a counterpoise correction to the
values. It can be seen that the HF contribution from the
true, gas-phase GTOs approaches that of the PGTOs as
the basis is increased.

Table II shows that the PGTOs and GTOs yield MP2
binding energies that deviate by more than 20 meV from
each other when no allowance is made for basis set super-
position error. This corresponds to approximately 10%
of the total binding energy even though the same ba-
sis set type is used. Basis set superposition errors are
a well-known drawback of atom-centered basis sets and
can typically lead to an overestimation of binding ener-
gies. This is because more basis coverage is available for
each monomer at shorter bond lengths, as it can exploit
the basis coverage supplied by the overlap of the func-
tions from the other monomer.

To better understand the origin of the diﬀerence be-
tween PGTOs and GTOs we have also included in ta-
ble II calculations with counterpoise corrections for the
basis set superposition error (BSSE). Both our PGTO
and GTO calculations lower the predicted binding ener-
gies by about 15 meV and 30 meV in the case of PGTOs
and GTOs respectively if BSSE is accounted for. Fur-
thermore the discrepancy between PGTOs and GTOs
for the MP2 correlation energy contribution to the bind-
ing energy is signiﬁcantly reduced and is on the order of
2-3 meV in the case of the aVDZ and aVTZ basis set.
From this we conclude that our PGTO basis sets yield a
comparably accurate description of electronic correlation
eﬀects as the GTO counterparts for molecular systems.
However, the observed BSSEs in PGTOs and GTOs are
diﬀerent, indicating that the procedure employed in con-
structing virtual PGTOs as outlined in Sec. II 4 results in
slightly smaller BSSEs in PGTOs as compared to GTOs
for this system. We note that the achieved accuracy of
a few meV provides conﬁdence in the constructed basis,
and is suﬃciently accurate to allow for reliable predic-
tions in ab initio calculations.

3. Nitrogen dimer

As a ﬁnal comparison for molecular systems, we now
seek to investigate the performance of the pseudized
GTO basis for the atomization of a prototypical cova-
lently bound system, the Nitrogen dimer. The calcula-
tions of N2 were performed using a 15×15×15 ˚A3 cubic
unit cell to minimize the interaction between the periodic
images. The plane wave energy cut oﬀ was set to 600 eV.
A bond length of 1.0656 ˚A was used as the equilibrium
geometry.

Table III summarizes the obtained binding energies on
the level of HF and MP2 theory using PGTOs and GTOs,
with and without counterpoise corrections for the BSSEs.
Again our results show that the PGTO Hartree–Fock
contributions to the dissociation energy are independent
of basis size, and agree well with the GTO results from
large basis sets. The GTO results using aug-cc-pVQZ
yield HF atomization energies that deviate by less than
2 meV from our results obtained using PGTOs within
VASP. On the level of MP2 theory the PGTOs and GTOs
results diﬀer more strongly, especially for the aVDZ ba-
sis set. This is a result of the number of diﬀerences: the
PAW framework for the core electrons, the pseudization
of the basis, and the diﬀerent virtual space, due to the
construction detailed in section II 4 and orthogonaliza-
tion to the complete occupied space. However, as the
basis is increased to aug-cc-pVTZ, the agreement is im-
proved, likely to be due to the fact that the larger space
mitigates the discrepancies in the construction of the vir-
tual space, as the occupied space of the GTOs is rapidly
approaching completeness. Once corrections for BSSE
are also included, the agreement in the MP2 is very good,
with the PGTOs and GTOs predicting a correlation en-
ergy contribution of 4.674 eV and 4.731 eV to the binding
energy, respectively.

However, the correlation energy contribution to the
binding energy converges very slowly with respect to the
largest angular momentum quantum number included in

the basis, and comparison to the aug-cc-VQZ GTO basis
results shows that we are not yet converged to ‘chemi-
cal accuracy’. Since we have not yet implemented the
required transformation routines for g-functions, we can-
not employ aug-cc-pVQZ PGTO basis sets or larger for
this element. We also stress that explicitly correlated
methods will greatly help in yielding a more rapid con-
vergence of the binding energies with respect to the ba-
sis set size for such covalently bonded systems. These
methods and their implementations are already being in-
vestigated in the framework of fully periodic systems us-
ing a plane wave basis set and the combination of these
diﬀerent techniques will be subject to a future study4,46.
Nonetheless our results indicate that the pseudized GTOs
yield results that are very similar compared to the all-
electron GTO results. While establishing the validity of
this comparison is important, the aim of this procedure
is not for application to molecular systems, but rather
for a compact basis for extended systems, which we now
consider and compare to experiment.

B. Extended systems

1. Neon solid

One area where a local Gaussian virtual space repre-
sentation is expected to perform well compared to plane
wave expansions is in the description of weakly interact-
ing, dispersion dominated extended systems. The aug-
cc-pVXZ hierarchy is expected to provide a rapidly con-
vergent and systematic truncation of the virtual basis
by spanning a space constructed to obtain the required
higher energy excitations for the dispersion interaction,
as compared to a strict energetic truncation of plane
wave or canonical virtual orbitals. This systematic trun-
cation can be of great beneﬁt if one seeks to calculate
converged energy diﬀerences between solids and isolated
atoms, where a strict orbital energetic truncation be-
comes physically meaningless. To this end, we demon-
strate the calculation of the atomization energy of the
Neon noble gas solid. The Neon solid has an fcc unit
cell, with a lattice constant of 4.641˚A, and the pseudized
Gaussian basis for the virtual space is expanded in plane
waves up to a cutoﬀ parameter of 700eV. The MP2 re-
sults of the solid have been calculated using a 6×6×6
k-point mesh, while the box size for the atomic system
is 30×30×30 ˚A3. For the HF contribution to the cohe-
sive energy we choose an even denser k-point mesh of
14×14×14. These parameters are suﬃcient to converge
the cohesive energy to within 1 meV.
Results for the atomization energy of this system can
be seen in Table IV, where we present HF and MP2 re-
sults obtained using PGTOs with and without counter-
poise (CP) corrections for the BSSE. Since the occupied
space is the same for each basis, as the basis choice simply
aﬀects the virtual orbitals in this scheme, the Hartree–
Fock contribution to the atomization energy in each basis

8

TABLE IV. Cohesive energy of the Neon solid using HF
and MP2 theory, in PGTO basis sets, with and without cor-
rections for BSSE. Comparison to the incremental results of
Ref. 47 for the MP2 energy are included. All units are in
meV.

Basis
aug-cc-pVDZ (no CP)
aug-cc-pVTZ (no CP)
aug-cc-pVDZ (CP)
aug-cc-pVTZ (CP)
aug-cc-pV(D,T)Z (extrap,CP)
Incremental method

HF
-8
-8
-8
-8
-8

MP2

19
24
10
16
19
18.8

is also seen to be the same. The binding of the solid is
also purely dispersive. As dispersive interactions are a
manifestation of correlated phenomena, this renders the
Hartree–Fock contribution negative, representing a re-
pulsive interaction at this level of theory. We therefore
consider the atomization energy at the level of MP2 the-
ory (which is believed to describe dispersion interactions
well in this system) with diﬀerent choices of virtual basis.
The benchmark MP2 result for this system has been
obtained using the incremental method, as detailed in
Ref. 47, which relies on a truncated many-body expan-
sion for the interactions, and has been shown to work
particularly well for such noble gas solids or molecu-
lar crystals48. Our ﬁndings indicate again that BSSEs
can be quite large on a relative scale for these weakly
bound systems and need to be accounted for.
If CP
corrections are included, our aug-cc-pVDZ and aug-cc-
pVTZ PGTO calculations predict MP2 atomization en-
ergies of 10 meV and 16 meV, respectively. To correct for
the remaining basis set incompleteness error we can also
perform a complete basis set (CBS) limit extrapolation,
theoretically justiﬁed according to the 1/L3 convergence
behavior of the correlation energy36,49,50. The obtained
CBS limit result is 19 meV, which is in good agreement
with results obtained using the incremental method of
18.8 meV, although we believe that the remaining error
from k-point sampling and convergence of other tech-
nical parameters in our calculations is on the order of
1 meV, and therefore such good agreement is somewhat
fortuitous. We note that the experimental value of the
atomization energy corrected for zero-point vibrational
eﬀects is 20.04 meV47,51–53 underlining the accuracy of
MP2 theory for this system54–56.

C. Water at LiH

As a ﬁnal application, we study water adsorption onto
the surface of a lithium hydride crystal at the level of
MP2 theory. Although dissolution is the fate of this ionic
crystal upon solvation, this process is ﬁrst instigated by
the adsorption of a single water molecule, and the system

9

TABLE VI. Adsorption energies for one water molecule on
the LiH surface using MP2 theory employing diﬀerent virtual
orbital manifolds with and without counterpoise corrections
for the BSSE. cc-pV(D,T)Z denotes the three-point extrapo-
lation to the complete basis limit50. All units are in meV.

Basis set
cc-pVDZ
cc-pVTZ
cc-pV(D,T)Z
Canonical HFOs

Nv
328
762

20523

EMP2

ads
510
365
304
217

EMP2(CP)

ads

157
195
211
217

and cc-pVTZ basis sets, respectively. The MP2 calcu-
lations include CP corrections for the BSSE. A simple
CBS limit extrapolation yields an adsorption energy of
211 meV, very close to the MP2 result of 215 meV ob-
tained using the incremental method reported in Ref.57.

To further verify the PGTOs approach we have also
performed a calculation with the full set of canonical
Hartree–Fock orbitals constructed from diagonalization
of the Fock operator in the complete plane wave basis set.
We note that this approach additionally employs a basis
set extrapolation technique which is outlined in Ref. 6.
The obtained adsorption energy of 217 meV is in very
good agreement with the other complete basis set limit
ﬁndings within the far smaller PGTO basis sets, summa-
rized in Table VI. However, if this huge set of canonical
virtual orbitals is truncated to similar sizes as the PGTO
virtual space, then results are poor, and comparison to
the bulk or isolated molecule is diﬃcult, as it is hard to
truncate the canonical space consistently for the diﬀerent
systems. It is remarkable to see that all three diﬀerent
techniques (Incremental method within GTOs, PGTOs
and complete canonical HF orbitals) yield results that
span a range between 211 meV and 217 meV only. How-
ever, we stress again that it is extremely important to
correct for BSSEs in the calculations as can be seen by
comparing EMP2
in Table VI, where the
BSSE is larger than the binding energy itself. Further-
more Table VI also presents the number of virtual or-
bitals employed in the diﬀerent calculations. The biggest
basis set in the PGTOs and the full plane wave basis in
the canonical HFOs calculations corresponds to 762 and
20,523 orbitals, respectively. This comparison demon-
strates strongly how much more compact the PGTOs
basis for such systems can become compared to canon-
ical HF orbitals.
In a future study we will investigate
this system in greater detail including methods that also
go beyond MP2 theory, as correlations beyond this level
are clearly important, as can be seen by comparison to
the CCSD(T) incremental results, and diﬀusion Monte
Carlo.

ads and EMP2(CP)

ads

FIG. 6. H2O@LiH adsorbtion site studied.

TABLE V. Adsorption energies for one water molecule on the
LiH surface at various levels of theory. Hartree–Fock and MP2
results are performed in diﬀerent PGTO basis sets, corrected
for BSSE, and extrapolated to the CBS limit for comparison.
Results from the incremental method and DMC are taken
from Ref. 57. All units are in meV.

HF
MP2
Incremental [MP2]
DFT-PBE
Incremental [CCSD(T)]
DMC

Eads/meV

cc-pVDZ

cc-pVTZ

44
157

44
195

CBS
44
211
215
214
246
237

has been studied extensively and with high accuracy by
incremental methods and diﬀusion Monte Carlo57,58. In
contrast to these, our work employs fully periodic bound-
ary conditions, and the projected Gaussian space for the
virtuals is expected to be eﬃcient in this cases since there
is much vacuum required in the simulation cell to avoid
spurious periodic images45. Figure 6 shows the relaxed
structure of the adsorbed water molecule on the LiH crys-
tal. The structures have been relaxed using the DFT-
PBE functional59. Only the atoms of the water molecule
have been allowed to relax. The LiH surface is modelled
using a two layer surface supercell containing 16 Li and
16 H atoms. These atoms have been kept ﬁxed to the
LiH crystal atom positions with a lattice constant corre-
sponding to 4.1108 ˚A. The O 1s states have been kept
frozen in the MP2 calculation. All other electronic states
have been treated as valence states.

Table V summarizes the binding energies of the wa-
ter molecule for diﬀerent methods. The DFT-PBE func-
tional yields a binding energy of 214 meV, which agrees
well with the value of 212 meV reported in Ref. 57. On
the level of Hartree–Fock, the water molecule exhibits
a binding energy of 44 meV for the relaxed structures.
However, adding the electron correlation eﬀects on the
level of MP2 theory yields an adsorption energy for wa-
ter of 157 meV and 195 meV for the pseudized cc-pVDZ

IV. CONCLUSION

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10

In this paper we have outlined a simple, black-box and
robust approach to use local, atom-centered Gaussian
basis functions within a plane wave basis set using the
projector augmented wave method and periodic bound-
ary conditions. The so-called pseudized Gaussian basis
set can be expanded eﬃciently in a plane wave basis set
with a moderate kinetic energy cutoﬀ. We have shown
that a hybrid approach whereby the occupied orbitals are
expanded in a plane wave basis set and only the virtual
orbital manifold is expanded in the pseudized Gaussian
basis set orthogonalized to the occupied orbitals provides
a compact and systematically improvable basis. The ad-
vantages of this over pure plane wave basis set calcu-
lations become most beneﬁcial in correlated wavefunc-
tion based calculations of low dimensional systems and
systems where weak interactions need to be described
with high accuracy. This is not unexpected since the size
of the plane wave basis set suﬀers from the fact that it
grows linearly with the box size regardless of the position
or number of atoms in the studied system. As a result
it is diﬃcult to devise systematic virtual orbital man-
ifold truncation schemes for rapidly convergent energy
diﬀerences. In contrast to plane waves, Gaussian atom-
centered basis sets take the local character of electronic
correlation into account a priori and allow for a system-
atic description of electronic correlation eﬀects such as
the polarizability using a system tailored and compact
basis set.

Of course, the introduction of such local basis sets also
always bears the burden of several shortcomings such
as basis set superposition errors (BSSE) and linear de-
pendencies of diﬀuse atom-centered basis functions in
densely packed solids. These problems can partly be ac-
counted for by counterpoise BSSE corrections and remov-
ing linearly dependent basis functions. The compromise
of a wavefunction expansion in Gaussians for the virtual
space and a plane wave expansion for the occupied space
seems an eﬃcient approach for combining the advantages
and mitigating the disadvantages of each basis. We note
that our method allows to easily switch between these
two diﬀerent basis sets (local atom-centered Gaussians
and periodic plane wave), which could potentially lead to
novel, transferable and more compact basis sets with the
aim to reduce the computational cost of correlated wave-
function based theories in periodic systems even further.
In the future, this infrastructure will be combined with
other correlated methods, including coupled-cluster and
F12 methods4,8,9,46,60. Furthermore, methods which di-
rectly exploit the locality of correlation eﬀects, including
quantum cluster methods such as dynamical mean-ﬁeld
theory61 and density matrix embedding theory62–65, as
well as more traditional domain-based approaches to lo-
cal correlation25,33,66 can be used within this framework,
and are being actively explored.

We gratefully acknowledge help with the implementa-
tion in VASP and useful discussions with Georg Kresse and
Martijn Marsman. G.H.B gratefully acknowledges fund-
ing from the Royal Society. G. K.-L. Chan acknowledges
support from the US Department of Energy through
grant de-sc0010530, with secondary support from grant
de-sc0008624 (SciDAC).

using

electron

gas

to

solid

state

“Convergence

of many-body
a plane-wave basis:

1T. Helgaker, P. Jørgensen, and J. Olsen, Molecular Electronic-
Structure Theory (Wiley, 2000).
2J. J. Shepherd, A. Gr¨uneis, G. H. Booth, G. Kresse,
wave-
and A. Alavi,
From
function expansions
homogeneous
systems,”
Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 86, 1–14 (2012),
1202.4990.
3J. J. Shepherd, G. H. Booth,
and A. Alavi, “Investi-
gation of the full conﬁguration interaction quantum Monte
Carlo method using homogeneous
electron gas models.”
J. Chem. Phys. 136, 244101 (2012).
4A. Gr¨uneis, J. J. Shepherd, A. Alavi, D. P. Tew, and G. H.
Booth, “Explicitly correlated plane waves: Accelerating conver-
gence in periodic wavefunction expansions,” J. Chem. Phys. 139,
084112 (2013).
5J. J. Shepherd and A. Gr¨uneis, “Many-body quantum chem-
istry for the electron gas: Convergent perturbative theories,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 1–5 (2013), 1310.6059.
6M. Marsman, A. Gr¨uneis, J. Paier, and G. Kresse, “Second-order
Møller-Plesset perturbation theory applied to extended systems.
I. Within the projector-augmented-wave formalism using a plane
wave basis set.” J. Chem. Phys. 130, 184103 (2009).
7A. Gulans,
perturbation
J. Chem. Phys. 141 (2014), 10.1063/1.4900447.
8A. Gr¨uneis, G. H. Booth, M. Marsman,
J. Spencer,
A. Alavi,
and G. Kresse, “Natural orbitals for wave func-
tion based correlated calculations using a plane wave basis set,”
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7, 2780–2785 (2011).
9G. H. Booth, A. Gruneis, G. Kresse, and A. Alavi, “Towards
an exact description of electronic wavefunctions in real solids,”
Nature 493, 365–370 (2013).

accurate many-body
correlation
eﬀects,”

numerically
Short-range

“Towards
theory:

10F. Ma, W. Purwanto, S. Zhang, and H. Krakauer, “Quantum
monte carlo calculations in solids with downfolded hamiltonians,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 226401 (2015).

11B. D. Dunnington and J. R. Schmidt, “A projection-free method
for representing plane-wave dft results in an atom-centered ba-
sis,” J. Chem. Phys. 143, 104109 (2015).

12J. I. Mustafa, S. Coh, M. L. Cohen, and S. G. Louie, “Automated
construction of maximally localized wannier functions: Opti-
mized projection functions method,” Phys. Rev. B 92, 165134
(2015).

13O. K. Andersen, “Linear methods in band theory,” Phys. Rev. B

12, 3060 (1975).

14T. Kotani and M. van Schilfgaarde, “A fusion of the lapw and the
lmto methods: the augmented plane wave plus muﬃn-tin orbital
(pmt) method,” Phys. Rev. B 81, 125117 (2010).

15A. Gulans, S. Kontur, C. Meisenbichler, D. Nabok, P. Pavone,
S. Rigamonti, S. Sagmeister, U. Werner, and C. Draxl, “excit-
ing: a full-potential all-electron package implementing density-
functional theory and many-body perturbation theory,” J. Phys.:
Condens. Matt. 26, 363202 (2014).

16L. Genovese, A. Neelov, S. Goedecker, T. Deutsch, S. A.
Ghasemi, A. Willand, D. Caliste, O. Zilberberg, M. Rayson,
A. Bergman, and R. Schneider, “Daubechies wavelets as a basis
set for density functional pseudopotential calculations,” J. Chem.
Phys. 129, 014109 (2008).

17T. Yanai, G. I. Fann, Z. Gan, R. J. Harrison, and G. Beylkin,
“Multiresolution quantum chemistry in multiwavelet bases: An-
alytic derivatives for hartreefock and density functional theory,”
J. Chem. Phys. 121, 2286–2876 (2004).
“Multiresolution

analysis

18T.

A.

of

Arias,
structure:

elec-
bases,”

tronic
semicardinal
Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 267–311 (1999).

and wavelet

19V. Blum, R. Gehrke, F. Hanke, P. Havu, V. Havu, X. Ren,
K. Reuter, and M. Scheﬄer, “Ab initio molecular simulations
with numeric atom-centered orbitals,” Comp. Phys. Comm. 180,
2175–2196 (2009).

20J. M. Soler, E. Artacho, J. D. Gale, A. Garca, J. Junquera,
P. Ordejn, and D. Snchez-Portal, “The siesta method for ab-
initio order-n materials simulation,” J. Phys.: Condens. Matt.
14, 2745–2779 (2002).

21T. H. Dunning, “Gaussian basis sets for use in correlated molecu-
lar calculations. i. the atoms boron through neon and hydrogen,”
J. Chem. Phys. 90, 10071023 (1989).

22N. Balabanov and K. Peterson, “Systematically convergent basis
sets for transition metals. i. all-electron correlation consistent
basis sets for the 3d elements sc - zn,” J. Chem. Phys. 123,
064107 (2005).

23R. Dovesi, R. Orlando, A. Erba, C. M. Zicovich-Wilson, B. Cival-
leri, S. Casassa, L. Maschio, M. Ferrabone, M. De La Pierre,
P. DArco, Y. Noel, M. Causa, M. Rerat, and B. Kirtman, “Crys-
tal14: A program for the ab initio investigation of crystalline
solids,” Int. J. Quantum Chem. 114, 1287–1317 (2014).

24C. Pisani, M. Schtz, S. Casassa, D. Usvyat, L. Maschio,
M. Lorenz, and A. Erba, “Cryscor: a program for the post-
hartree-fock treatment of periodic systems,” Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 14, 7615 (2012).

25L. Maschio, D. Usvyat, M. Schtz, and B. Civalleri, “Periodic
local mllerplesset second order perturbation theory method ap-
plied to molecular crystals: Study of solid nh3 and co2 using
extended basis sets,” J. Chem. Phys. 132, 134706 (2010).

26M. V. Arnim and R. Ahlrichs, “Parallelization of density func-
tional and ri-coulomb approximation in turbomole,” J. Comp.
Chem. 19, 1746 (1998).
27G. Lippert, J. Hutter,

and M. Parinello, “The gaussian and
augmented-plane-wave density functional method for ab initio
molecular dynamics simulations,” Theor. Chem. Acc. 103, 124
(1999).

28J. VandeVondele and J. Hutter, “An eﬃcient orbital transfor-
mation method for electronic structure calculations,” J. Chem.
Phys. 118, 4365 (2003).

29S. Goedecker, “Linear scaling electronic structure methods,” Rev.

Mod. Phys. 71, 1085–1123 (1999).

30M. C. Strain, G. E. Scuseria, and M. J. Frisch, “Achieving linear
scaling for the electronic quantum coulomb problem,” Science
271, 51–53 (1996).

31J. C. Burant, G. E. Scuseria,

and M. J. Frisch, “A linear
scaling method for hartree-fock exchange calculations of large
molecules,” J. Chem. Phys. 105, 8969–8972 (1996).

32S. Goedecker and G. E. Scuseria, “Linear scaling electronic struc-
ture methods in chemistry and physics,” Comp. Sci. Eng. 5, 14–
21 (2003).

33C. Pisani, L. Maschio, S. Casassa, M. Halo, M. Schtz,

and
D. Usvyat, “Periodic local mp2 method for the study of electronic
correlation in crystals: Theory and preliminary applications,” J.
Comput. Chem. 29, 2113–2124 (2008).

34T. Kato, Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 10, 151–177 (1957).
35W. Kutzelnigg and J. D. Morgan, “Rates of convergence of
the partial-wave expansions of atomic correlation energies,”
J. Chem. Phys 96, 4484–4508 (1992).

36W. Kutzelnigg and J. D. Morgan III, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 4484

(1992).

37J. J. Shepherd, A. Gr¨uneis, G. H. Booth, G. Kresse,

and
A. Alavi, “Convergence of many-body wave-function expansions
using a plane-wave basis: From homogeneous electron gas to solid
state systems,” Phys. Rev. B 86, 035111 (2012).

11

38G. H. Booth, D. Cleland, A. Alavi, and D. P. Tew, “An explicitly
correlated approach to basis set incompleteness in full conﬁgu-
ration interaction quantum monte carlo,” J. Chem. Phys. 137,
164112 (2012).

39P. Pulay, Chem. Phys. Lett. 100, 151 (1983).
40P.

“Projector

Bl¨ochl,

E.

augmented-wave method,”

Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953–17979 (1994).

41G. Kresse and D. Joubert, “From ultrasoft pseudopo-
augmented-wave method,”

the

tentials
Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758–1775 (1999).

projector

to

42G. Kresse and J. Hafner, “Norm-conserving and ultra-
soft pseudopotentials for ﬁrst-row and transition elements,”
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 6, 8245–8257 (1994).

43F. Birch,

“Finite

elastic

strain

of

cubic

crystals,”

Phys. Rev. 71, 809–824 (1947).

44J. M. Turney, A. C. Simmonett, R. M. Parrish, E. G. Hohenstein,
F. Evangelista, J. T. Fermann, B. J. Mintz, L. A. Burns, J. J.
Wilke, M. L. Abrams, N. J. Russ, M. L. Leininger, C. L. Janssen,
E. T. Seidl, W. D. Allen, H. L. Schaefer, R. A. King, E. F. Valeev,
C. D. Sherrill, and T. D. Crawford, “Psi4: An open-source ab
initio electronic structure program,” WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci.
2, 556 (2012).

45M. Preuss, W. G. Schmidt, K. Seino, J. Furthmuller,

and

F. Bechstedt, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 112 (2004).

46A. Gr¨uneis, “Eﬃcient explicitly correlated many-electron per-
turbation theory for solids: Application to the schottky defect in
mgo,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 066402 (2015).
47P. Schwerdtfeger, B. Assadollahzadeh,

and A. Her-
mann,
perturba-
tion series
of neon and argon,”
Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 82, 1–11 (2010).
48B. Paulus, “The method of incrementsa wavefunction-based ab
initio correlation method for solids,” Phys. Rep. 428, 1 (2006).
49W. Kutzelnigg and J. D. Morgan III, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 8821

“Convergence
the

the Moller-Plesset

lattices

of
fcc

for

(1992).

50T. Helgaker, W. Klopper, H. Koch, and J. Noga, J. Chem. Phys.

106, 9639 (1997).

51D. N. Batchelder, D. L. Losee, and R. O. Simmons, Phys. Rev.

162, 767 (1967).

52D. N. Batchelder, D. L. Losee, and R. O. Simmons, Phys. Rev.

173, 873 (1968).

53Y. Endoh, G. Shirane, and J. Skalyo Jr., Phys. Rev. B 11, 1681

(1975).

54A. West and F. Merkt, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 8807 (2003).
55J. F. Ogilvie and F. Y. H. Wang, J. Mol. Struct. 273, 277 (1992).
56P. R. Herman, P. E. LaRoque, and B. P. Stoicheﬀ, J. Chem.

Phys. 89, 4535 (1988).

57S. Binnie, “Ab initio surface energetics: beyond chemical accu-

racy,” PhD Thesis (2011).

58S. J. Binnie, S. J. Nolan, N. D. Drummond, D. Alf`e, N. L. Allan,
F. R. Manby, and M. J. Gillan, “Bulk and surface energetics of
crystalline lithium hydride: Benchmarks from quantum monte
carlo and quantum chemistry,” Phys. Rev. B 82, 165431 (2010).
Ernzerhof,
simple,”

approximation made

K. Burke,

and M.

Perdew,

“Generalized
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868 (1996).

gradient

59J.

P.

60A. Gruneis, M. Marsman, J. Harl, L. Schimka, and G. Kresse,
“Making the random phase approximation to electronic correla-
tion accurate,” J. Chem. Phys. 131, 154115 (2009).

61G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, V. S. Oudovenko,
and C. A. Marianetti, “Electronic struc-
theory,”

O. Parcollet,
ture
Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 865–951 (2006).

dynamical mean-ﬁeld

calculations with

62G. Knizia and G. K.-L. Chan, “Density matrix embed-
ding: A simple alternative to dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 186404 (2012).

63B.-X. Zheng and G. K.-L. Chan, “Ground-state phase diagram of
the square lattice hubbard model from density matrix embedding
theory,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 035126 (2016).

64W. C. Ireneusz W. Bulik and G. E. Scuseria, “Electron corre-
lation in solids via density embedding theory,” J. Chem. Phys.
141, 054113 (2014).

12

65G. H. Booth and G. K.-L. Chan, “Spectral functions of strongly
correlated extended systems via an exact quantum embedding,”
Phys. Rev. B 91, 155107 (2015).

66M. Schwilk, D. Usvyat,

and H.-J. Werner, “Communication:
Improved pair approximations in local coupled-cluster methods,”
The Journal of Chemical Physics 142, 121102 (2015).

