K¨unstliche Intelligenz manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

A System for Probabilistic Linking of Thesauri and
Classiﬁcation Systems

Lisa Posch · Philipp Schaer · Arnim Bleier · Markus Strohmaier

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
I

A
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
8
4
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract This paper presents a system which creates
and visualizes probabilistic semantic links between con-
cepts in a thesaurus and classes in a classiﬁcation sys-
tem. For creating the links, we build on the Polylingual
Labeled Topic Model (PLL-TM) [6]. PLL-TM identiﬁes
probable thesaurus descriptors for each class in the clas-
siﬁcation system by using information from the natural
language text of documents, their assigned thesaurus
descriptors and their designated classes. The links are
then presented to users of the system in an interac-
tive visualization, providing them with an automati-
cally generated overview of the relations between the
thesaurus and the classiﬁcation system.

Lisa Posch
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences
Cologne, Germany
Institute for Web Science and Technologies
University of Koblenz-Landau, Germany
E-mail: lisa.posch@gesis.org

Philipp Schaer
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences
Cologne, Germany
E-mail: philipp.schaer@gesis.org

Arnim Bleier
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences
Cologne, Germany
E-mail: arnim.bleier@gesis.org

Markus Strohmaier
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences
Cologne, Germany
Institute for Web Science and Technologies
University of Koblenz-Landau, Germany
E-mail: markus.strohmaier@gesis.org

Keywords Thesauri · Classiﬁcation · Probabilistic
Linking · Interactive Visualization

1 Introduction

Thesauri and classiﬁcation systems are two diﬀerent
kinds of Knowledge Organisation Systems (KOS) which
are widely used in Library and Information Science
for annotating documents and other artifacts in (digi-
tal) libraries, archives or information systems [9]. While
both KOS share the common foundational idea of using
structured controlled vocabularies to describe concepts,
they diﬀer in terms of complexity and broadness.

Diﬀering structural features of thesauri and classi-
ﬁcation systems render them suitable for diﬀerent types
of applications, as pointed out by Tudhope et al.: “While
the structure of a classiﬁcation system and a thesaurus
may be fairly similar, in that both consist of hierarchi-
cal structures of concepts, they will tend to diﬀer in the
exhaustivity and speciﬁcity of their application to infor-
mation items. Thus an information item will generally
tend to be classiﬁed by fewer, more general concepts
from a classiﬁcation system and conversely will tend to
be indexed by several, more speciﬁc concepts from a
thesaurus.” [8, p. 25]

Consequently, many digital libraries1 use diﬀerent
KOS to describe each document in order to complement
their advantages. The usage of diﬀerent KOS is helpful,
for example, in an interactive retrieval scenario where

1 Like PubMed, ACM Digital Library, RePeC, EconStor,

SSOAR, and others.

2

Lisa Posch et al.

system which uses topic models for identifying latent
semantic links between diﬀerent KOS of the same do-
main.

2 System Description

The system consists of two main components: The ﬁrst
component is responsible for extracting the links with
PLL-TM, whereby each class in the classiﬁcation sys-
tem is described by a distribution over thesaurus de-
scriptors. The second component is an interactive brow-
ser-based visualization of the links, implemented us-
ing the JavaScript library D32. Here, the links, i.e. the
classes contained in the classiﬁcation system along with
their most probable thesaurus descriptors, are visual-
ized as nodes in an interactive collapsible tree.

Probabilistic Link Extraction. PLL-TM is a su-
pervised topic model which accounts for multiple lan-
guages while simultaneously restricting the topics of a
document to its labels. In the context of this system,
PLL-TM models two languages in order to create links
between classes and descriptors: the natural language
words of the documents represent the ﬁrst language,
and the controlled vocabulary of the thesaurus consti-
tute the second language. The classes with which a doc-
ument is annotated represent the documents’ labels.

This setup gives the system the ability to probabilis-
tically link thesaurus descriptors to classes in a classiﬁ-
cation system, using both the natural language text of
the abstracts and the assigned thesaurus descriptors as
information for creating the links. PLL-TM then gen-
erates one topic per class in the classiﬁcation system,
described by a distribution over thesaurus descriptors.
Interactive Visualization. The second component
takes the links generated by PLL-TM as input and
displays them in an interactive browser-based visual-
ization. Classiﬁcation systems have a hierarchical tree-
structure, which is kept in the visualization. Each link
is displayed as one node in the classiﬁcation tree, con-
taining the class that it represents as well as the ﬁve
most probable thesaurus descriptors for this class. Fig-
ure 2 shows a screenshot of the system applied to link-
ing a thesaurus and a classiﬁcation system from the
social sciences domain (also see Section 3) as well as a
zoomed-in close-up of three nodes, i.e. links. Sub-trees
of the classiﬁcation system are interactively expandable

2 http://d3js.org/

Fig. 1 Excerpt of a “cheat sheet”. This ﬁgure shows
an excerpt of a “cheat sheet”, a document oﬀering informal
descriptions of possible links between a thesaurus and a clas-
siﬁcation system. These documents are created in order to
support the work of human indexers who work simultane-
ously with both KOS.

users can drill down on thesaurus- or keyword-based
search results by using a classiﬁcation-based ﬁlter. An-
other example of hybrid use of thesauri and classiﬁ-
cation systems is search term recommendation, where
specialised recommender systems were trained for dif-
ferent sub-classiﬁcations of a text corpus [3]. While both
classiﬁcation systems and thesauri have semantic links
between the concepts which they contain, semantic links
between the two KOS are missing.

Problem. In manual and semi-automatic indexing,
human indexers work simultaneously with both KOS.
Currently, the only support for displaying a link be-
tween the two KOS is oﬀered in form of a manually cre-
ated “cheat sheet”, a document listing rules of thumb
for selecting a class from the classiﬁcation system, once
a thesaurus concept has been chosen. However, manual
creation of such links is a labor-intensive process and
therefore, “cheat sheets” often merely provide incom-
plete and outdated support to users. Figure 1 depicts
an excerpt of such a document. To address this short-
coming, we present a system which computes the latent
semantic links between thesauri and classiﬁcation sys-
tems and visualizes them in an explicit way.

Contribution. The main contribution of this pa-
per is a system which creates and visualizes probabilis-
tic semantic links between thesaurus descriptors and
classes contained in a classiﬁcation system. These links
are generated by the Polylingual Labeled Topic Model
(PLL-TM) [6] from document corpora where both KOS
are used simultaneously in the metadata curation. The
probabilistic links are then visualized in an interac-
tive way. While these semantic links were previously
only available in a manual ad-hoc or informal manner,
we can now systematically identify and visualize these
links. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst

A System for Probabilistic Linking of Thesauri and Classiﬁcation Systems

3

Fig. 2 Visualization of the links. This ﬁgure shows a screenshot of the system’s user interface as well as a zoomed-in
close-up of three links. Each link between a class in the classiﬁcation system and thesaurus descriptors is represented by a tree
node. The tree nodes contain the class number, the name of the class and the ﬁve most probable thesaurus descriptors inferred
by the system through PLL-TM. Sub-trees are interactive and collapsible/expandable so that the user only sees those parts
of the classiﬁcation system which he or she is interested in. Dark nodes have children (are expandable), light nodes are leaves
or already expanded nodes.

and collapsible so that only those parts are displayed
that the user is interested in. In the visualization, the
nodes which are expandable (i.e. have undisplayed chil-
dren) are displayed in a dark color, the nodes which
are already expanded or are leaves are displayed in a
lighter color. The implementation of the visualization
uses D3, a JavaScript library for creating data-driven
documents [2]. The arrangement of the nodes is based
on Bostock’s implementation [1] of the Reingold-Tilford
algorithm [7].

dexing and contains about 8.000 descriptors as well as
4.000 non-descriptors (i.e. synonyms). For extracting
the links, we use documents from the Social Science Lit-
erature Information System (SOLIS). SOLIS contains
metadata of German social science publications, and
all publications have been manually indexed with the
TheSoz and manually classiﬁed with the CSS by hu-
man domain experts. However, currently, the two KOS
are not linked beyond their joint usage for individual
documents.

3 Application of the System in the Social
Science Domain

We apply the system to linking two KOS from the social
sciences domain: the SKOS Thesaurus for the Social
Sciences (TheSoz) [10] and the Classiﬁcation for the
Social Sciences (CSS). The CSS is used for disciplinary
categorization of documents and consists of 159 classes
in four hierarchy levels. TheSoz is used for subject in-

The system’s ﬁrst component trains PLL-TM on the
abstracts and TheSoz descriptors of SOLIS documents,
restricting the permitted topics for each document to
its assigned classes. In our case, we used all documents
which were published in the years 2008 to 2013, result-
ing in a corpus of about 60.000 documents. The sec-
ond component visualizes the links: For example, the
class “40200 Administrative Science” is a second-level
class in the CSS hierarchy which the system linked to
the descriptors public administration, administration,

4

Lisa Posch et al.

reform, management and modernization (translation of
the rightmost close-up in Figure 2).

Usage Scenarios. The context in which our sys-
tem will be applied is the classiﬁcation and semantic
indexing process in the social science domain. Work-
ing with domain-speciﬁc KOS is a non-trivial issue in
every complex scientiﬁc domain, but this is especially
prominent in the social sciences where there is a high
heterogeneity in the use of specialized languages [4] in
diﬀerent sub-domains. Therefore, a signiﬁcant amount
of domain knowledge and experience is usually required
to work with the KOS. A visualization of the latent se-
mantic links between two KOS can help mitigate this
complexity for diﬀerent groups of users of repositories
or digital library systems: (1) trainee indexers who just
started to learn to work with KOS, (2) authors who
want to classify their publications, (3) researchers who
want to improve the retrieval process by incorporating
knowledge about the structure and meaning of concepts
in the KOS, or (4) expert indexers who are already fa-
miliar with the KOS but will beneﬁt from a structured
visualization of the latent semantic links between two
KOS.

While numerous diﬀerent applications of the sys-
tem are conceivable, we highlight one speciﬁc use case:
the system’s use during the subject indexing process.
In the ﬁrst step of this process, one or more classes are
selected for a new document, either predicted automat-
ically or chosen manually. In the case of automatic class
prediction, we have already shown that using SVM or
topic models to predict the top hierarchy levels of the
classiﬁcation leads to good results [5]. If the class is
selected manually, the linked thesaurus descriptors fa-
cilitate the decision by serving as descriptions of the
concepts which the classes represent. Then, once a class
is chosen for a document, the most probable descriptors
for this class provide the user with a set of likely annota-
tion candidates to choose from. This two step approach
is useful due to the lower dimensionality of the classi-
ﬁcation system compared to the thesaurus: Intuitively,
choosing one class out of 159 is easier than choosing one
descriptor out of 8.000.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a system for probabilis-
tic semantic linking of thesaurus descriptors to classes
in a classiﬁcation system. The system consists of two

components: (1) probabilistic semantic link generation
using PLL-TM and (2) interactive visualization of the
links. Identifying and visualizing latent semantic links
between two KOS is helpful in scenarios such as ex-
ploratory classiﬁcation browsing and as support during
the subject indexing process.

For future work, we plan to apply the system in dif-
ferent domains and evaluate the extracted links with
human expert indexers. Furthermore, we plan to de-
velop a (semi-)automatic annotation system which ex-
ploits the links not only at the global KOS level, but
suggests classes and a set of thesaurus descriptors for
individual documents.

References

1. Bostock, M.: Collapsible Tree (2012 (accessed May 12,

2015)). URL http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/4339083

2. Bostock, M., Ogievetsky, V., Heer, J.: D3 data-
driven documents.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.
17(12), 2301–2309 (2011). DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2011.
185. URL http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.
1109/TVCG.2011.185

3. L¨uke, T., Schaer, P., Mayr, P.: Improving retrieval results
with discipline-speciﬁc query expansion. In: Theory and
Practice of Digital Libraries, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 7489, pp. 408–413. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg (2012). DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-33290-6 44. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33290-6_44

4. Petras, V.: Translating dialects in search: Mapping be-
tween specialized languages of discourse and documen-
tary languages. Ph.D. thesis, University of California,
Berkeley (2006)

5. Posch, L.: Enriching ontologies with encyclopedic back-
ground knowledge for document indexing.
In: The Se-
mantic Web – ISWC 2014, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 8797, pp. 537–544. Springer International
Publishing (2014). DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11915-1 36.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11915-1_
36

6. Posch, L., Bleier, A., Schaer, P., Strohmaier, M.: The
polylingual labeled topic model. In: KI 2015: Advances
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Springer (2015)

7. Reingold, E.M., Tilford, J.S.: Tidier drawings of trees.
IEEE Trans. Software Eng. 7(2), 223–228 (1981).
DOI 10.1109/TSE.1981.234519.
URL http://doi.
ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/TSE.1981.234519

8. Tudhope, D., Koch, T., Heery, R.: Terminology services
and technology: Jisc state of the art review. Tech. rep.
(2006). URL http://opus.bath.ac.uk/23563/

9. Weller, K.: Knowledge Representation in the Social Se-

mantic Web, 1 edn. K G Saur Verlag (2010)

10. Zapilko, B., Schaible, J., Mayr, P., Mathiak, B.: Thesoz:
A SKOS representation of the thesaurus for the social
sciences. Semantic Web 4(3), 257–263 (2013). DOI
10.3233/SW-2012-0081. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
3233/SW-2012-0081

