6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
8
4
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

Steven A. Balbus1,2,3 and William J. Potter1
1 Department of Physics, Astrophysics, University of Oxford, Denys Wilkinson
Building, Keble Road, Oxford OX13RH

E-mail: steven.balbus@physics.ox.ac.uk
2 Laboratoire de Radioastronomie, ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure, 24 rue Lhomond,
75231 Paris CEDEX 05, France
3 Institut universitaire de France, Maison des Universit´es, 103 blvd. Saint-Michel,
75005 Paris, France

Abstract.

Much of astrophysics consists of the study of ionised gas under the inﬂuence
of gravitational and magnetic ﬁelds. Thus,
it is not possible to understand the
astrophysical universe without a detailed knowledge of the dynamics of magnetised
ﬂuids. Fluid dynamics is, however, a notoriously tricky subject, in which it is all too
easy for one’s a priori intuition to go astray. In this review, we seek to guide the reader
through a series of illuminating yet deceptive problems, all with an enlightening twist.
We cover a broad range of topics including the instabilities acting in accretion discs,
the hydrodynamics governing the convective zone of the Sun, the magnetic shielding
of a cooling galaxy cluster, and the behaviour of thermal instabilities and evaporating
clouds. The aim of this review is to surprise and intrigue even veteran astrophysical
theorists with an idiosynchratic choice of problems and counterintuitive results. At the
same time, we endeavour to bring forth the fundamental ideas, to set out important
assumptions, and to describe carefully whatever novel techniques may be appropriate
to the problem at hand. By beginning at the beginning, and analysing a wide variety of
astrophysical settings, we seek not only to make this review suitable for ﬂuid dynamic
veterans, but to engage novice recruits as well with what we hope will be an unusual
and instructive introduction to the subject.

Submitted to: Rep. Prog. Phys.

1. Introduction

Fluid dynamics plays a deﬁning role in shaping our understanding of the vast majority of
physical processes unfolding throughout the cosmos. Indeed, the dominant composition
of the current Universe in the form stars, accretion discs, galaxies, galaxy clusters and
the all-pervasive gaseous medium between such overdensities, is at heart a vast ensemble
of inhomogeneous, magnetised, gravitating bodies of ﬂuid. Astrophysical ﬂuid dynamics
provides the overarching structure needed to describe large-scale processes at w ork in
our Universe. However, the physics of magnetised ﬂuids is a messy business. The theorist

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

2

must contend with distressingly long mean-free-paths, turbulence, plasma instabilities,
magnetic stresses, radiation physics, and the list goes on. Often there is little choice
but to resort to a highly phenomenological formalism and, when, as often happens,
the phenomenology takes on a life of its own, the distinction between guesswork and
fundamentals is blurred. At the end of complex simulation, what has actually been
explained? The answer, more often that not, is unsatisfyingly ambiguous.

In this article, we will attempt to shine a bit of light through these murky depths,
highlighting a series of problems in a broad range of settings, all of which contain an
enlightening twist. We have tried to be careful to distinguish fundamental physics
from any assumptions that need to be made. We hope that the article will serve the
needs both of seasoned researchers looking for something new, and of those who may
be embarking on their own research programmes in astrophysical ﬂuid dynamics, who
would welcome a broader introductory review.

The basic idea for this article stems from a series of monographs by Sir Rudolf
Peierls on the theme of surprises in theoretical physics (Peierls 1979, 1991) which inspired
the 2011 Spitzer Lectures given at Princeton Unversity given by one of us (SAB). Peierls
discusses a series of problems, all of which contain some kind of enlightening twist: a
contradiction that really isn’t, something that looks hard but turns out to be simple (or
vice-versa), a technique that looks ideal for the problem at hand and then crashes, a
technique that looks like it is being egregiously misapplied that works beautifully. With
welcome rare exceptions, standard texts do not spend much time exploring seemingly
promising approaches that actually fail. This is a pity, because it is all too easy to be
fooled. Just how easy will perhaps be made apparent in this article, via several examples
from a wide variety of diﬀerent subject areas.

More importantly, we hope that this article will serve to illustrate how much remains
to be understood of what would seem to be the most basic properties of astrophysical
gases. The coupling between heating, cooling and buoyancy, the inertial quirks of
rotationally-dominated dynamics, and especially the insidious eﬀects of weak magnetic
ﬁelds can all play havoc with one’s physical intuition. Theorists are still in the process
of learning ﬁrst-hand just how counterintuitively magnetised ﬂuids can behave.

Thus motivated, the authors have selected a set of fundamental problems of general
interest, each of which has a story to tell. In a few cases, the problem discussed has
turned out to be important, but not in all cases. (At least not yet!) We chose these
examples not for their immediate impact (though in a few cases the ultimate impact
has been considerable), but because we have found them to be generally illuminating
of important physical principles, or because there was an intellectual novelty to the
problem not widely appreciated, or just because they were interesting.

This then is a review in the spirit of Peierls’ books, a collection of problems from
the dynamics of astrophysical ﬂuids that a practising expert might be able to read
with enjoyment, but which might also serve as a technical introduction for a motivated
beginner or outsider. We make no apologies for the idiosyncratic choice of topics; the
unusual blend of problems is deliberate. We have tried to ensure that the astrophysical

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

3

content of all problems is as clear and as self-contained as possible.

We begin by way of review with the fundamental set of governing equations relevant
to astrophysical gas ﬂows. This is followed by the ﬁrst of our problems, that of thermal
evaporation of cool interstellar clouds by a hot ambient medium, a problem ﬁrst treated
in detail for isolated clouds in the classic work of Cowie and McKee (1977). After
establishing an interesting analogy with ordinary electrostatics, we then move on to
examine the problem of thermal instability in a medium that is subject to bulk heating
and cooling. Another classic problem of interstellar medium theory (Field 1965; Field,
Goldsmith, & Habing 1969), thermal instability theory in a stratiﬁed medium turns
out to be rich in surprises with insights aﬀorded by thermodynamic identities and very
complex dynamics.

Continuing in this thermal vein, we revisit the thermal conduction problem, this
time with a weak magnetic ﬁeld included. For the very dilute plasmas of interest in
astrophysics, a magnetic ﬁeld makes a huge diﬀerence to the way in which heat is
conducted. Because of the tiny electron Larmor radius, heat ﬂows only along the
magnetic lines of force, even for a very weak magnetic ﬁeld. The surprises here
are stunning: a host of new dynamical instabilities, when there is more-or-less any
temperature gradient in a stratiﬁed medium.

For larger ﬁeld strengths in a stratiﬁed medium the Newcomb-Parker (Newcomb
1961, Parker 1966) instability is an issue, and is the topic of the next section. The
surprise here is that the strong magnetic ﬁeld makes no diﬀerence to the Schwarzschild
instability criterion, when written as a constraint on the vertical density gradient in
a gravitational ﬁeld. The twist is a very simple demonstration of this. Of course the
classic calculation does not include thermal conduction along ﬁeld lines, so it would be
amiss not to revisit Newcomb-Parker with this in mind. Surprise—or not, depending on
your prior inclination—the Newcomb-Parker stability criterion is dramatically altered.
Next is a sort of local “theory-of-everything,” at least in the linear adiabatic
regime. By this we mean a derivation of a very compact vector equation for
small, three-dimensional Lagrangian displacements in an axisymmetric but otherwise
arbitrary magnetised, diﬀerentially rotating and stratiﬁed background. The equation
is so powerful that many well-known problems—including the endlessly surprising
magnetorotational instability—can be almost read oﬀ from it directly. Our ﬁnal two
problems are (i) a discussion of the remarkable Papaloizou-Pringle instability, which
keeps arising, often unrecognised, in diﬀerent settings, and reminds us of the crucial role
that boundary conditions may play in regulating stability behaviour; (ii) a very simple
possible explanation of what seems to be a very complicated problem: the rotation
pattern of the solar convection zone. Here the realisation that convection tends to occur
in cells of constant angular velocity and constant entropy (crucially, however, with the
unstable driving radial gradient subtracted oﬀ!) allows a direct analytic solution for
the shape of the isorotation contours. A welcome surprise: turbulent ﬂow need not be
totally unfathomable.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

4

2. Fundamental equations

For ease of reference, to establish notation, to highlight a few points of interest, and
with apologies to the well-initiated, let us remind ourselves of the fundamental equations
of astrophysical ﬂuid dynamics (e.g. Shu 1991) and their immediate consequences.
Throughout this review, we use the notation (x, y, z) for Cartesian coordinates, (R, φ, z)
for (radial, azimuthal, axial) cylindrical coordinates, and (r, θ, φ) for (radial, colatitude,
azimuthal) spherical coordinates.

2.1. Mass conservation

If V is a ﬁxed volume in space and S its bounding surface, then the mass M within V
changes with time only if there is a net ﬂux of mass integrated over S. With ρ equal to
the mass density and v the local velocity ﬁeld, we have

(cid:90)

dM
dt

=

dV = −

∂ρ
∂t

V

(cid:90)

S

ρv·dS.

(1)

(2)

Since V is an arbitrary volume, the divergence theorem gives immediately

+ ∇·(ρv) = 0,

∂ρ
∂t

the equation of mass conservation. It is also customary to use Cartesian index notation,
with i, j, k used to represent the x, y, and z variables. As usual, repeated indices are
summed over unless otherwise explicitly stated. Thus, mass conservation may also be
written

∂tρ + ∂i(ρvi) = 0,

(3)

where the subscripted ∂ symbol denotes partial diﬀerentiation with respect to cartesian
coordinate xi.

It will prove very useful to introduce the Langrangian time derivative following a

ﬂuid element, denoted D/Dt:

D
Dt

=

∂
∂t

+ v·∇ = ∂t + vi∂i.

In terms of the Lagrangian derivative, the mass conservation equation becomes

D ln ρ

Dt

= −∇·v

2.2. Entropy equation

(4)

(5)

Let S be the entropy per particle. Up to an irrelevant additive constant, for an ideal
gas

S =

kB
γ − 1

ln P ρ−γ.

(6)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

5

Here, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, γ is the ratio of speciﬁc heats at constant pressure to
that of constant density, and P is the gas pressure. Typically, γ is 5/3 for a monatomic
gas and 7/5 for a diatomic molecular gas. In the γ → 1 isothermal limit,

S = −kB ln ρ.

To change the entropy of a travelling ﬂuid element, explicit heat sources (or sinks)
are required: for a given Lagrangian ﬂuid element, T dS = dq, where dq is the change of
heat per particle. It is more usual to work with the heat per unit volume. For example,
if F is the heat ﬂux in units of energy per area per time, then the volume speciﬁc heating
rate is −∇·F . The volume speciﬁc change in entropy is simply ndS, where n is the
number density of particles. Thus, a typical astrophysical gasdynamic rendering of the
entropy equation will take the form

P
γ − 1

D(ln P ρ−γ)

Dt

= −∇·F + sources − sinks.

(7)

where the ideal gas equation of state P = nkBT has been used. Possible sources might
include ohmic or viscous heating, or high energy external particles. A common sink
term is losses from radiation (cf. §2.6 below).

In contrast to the mass equation, whose form rarely changes, the entropy equation
must be constructed anew for each environment. Happily, in many applications, the
adiabatic limit of zero heat exchange is a suﬃciently good approximation to use.

2.3. Dynamical equation of motion

Newton’s law of motion “F = ma” takes the form

ρ

Dv
Dt

= −∇P − ρ∇Φ − ∇·Π + J×B,

(8)

where Π is the viscous stress tensor whose precise form need not concern us here (it
is a complex subtopic unto itself), but the term may very often be ignored. Magnetic
ﬁelds make an appearance in the ﬁnal J × B Lorentz force term. Here J is the current
density and B the magnetic ﬁeld vector. In the problems that we will discuss, Maxwell’s
displacement current may be ignored (since the velocities are non-relativistic), so that

µ0J = ∇×B

(9)
where µ0 is the usual vacuum permeability, 4π × 10−7 in SI units. The Lorentz force
becomes, using a standard vector identity,
(∇ × B) × B = −∇ B2
2µ0

(B · ∇)B.

1
µ0

+

1
µ0

(10)

This may be interpreted as magnetic pressure force arising from the ﬁrst term on the
right, plus a restoring tension force from the second term. The tension arises from the
distortion of the magnetic ﬁeld’s line of force. Such distortions can propagate along a
ﬁeld line in a manner precisely analogous to waves propagating along a taut string under
tension. This mode of response is peculiar to a magnetized gas, allowing it to host shear

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

6

waves with no corresponding change in the density or pressure. These disturbances are
called “Alfv´en waves,” which play a key role in the behaviour of astrophysical gases in
many environments. The equation of motion without the viscous term now reads:

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

ρ

Dv
Dt

= −∇

P +

B2
2µ0

− ρ∇Φ +

1
µ0

(B · ∇)B.

(11)

(12)

2.4. Conservation of Vorticity

In the absence of magnetic ﬁelds, the equation of motion simpliﬁes to

∂v
∂t

+ (v·∇)v ≡ Dv
Dt

= − 1
ρ

∇P − ∇Φ

Let us apply this equation to the following curious little problem. What is the
Lagrangian derivative of a small line element dl as it moves embedded in the velocity
ﬁeld? Clearly, if one moves with one end of the moving line element and watches what
happens to the other end, there is a change in dl only if this other end moves in this
relative sense. In that case, the change in dl after a time ∆t is given by

which gives

∆(dl) = (dl·∇)v∆t,

D(dl)

Dt

= (dl·∇)v.

(13)

(14)

Now, if in equation (12), we restrict ourselves to the case in which P is a function only
of ρ (a “barotropic” ﬂuid), or if ρ is a constant, then the right side of equation (12) is
a pure gradient, say ∇Υ. Then
Dv
Dt

(15)
where (12) and (14) have been used. If we integrate v · dl around a ﬁnite loop moving
with the ﬂuid, then the rate of change of this integral vanishes:

·dl + v·D(dl)
Dt

= dl·∇(Υ + v2/2)

D(v · dl)

=

v · dl =

(v · dl) =

dl·∇(Υ + v2/2) = 0

(16)

(cid:73) D

Dt

(cid:73)

Dt

(cid:73)

D
Dt

since the line integral of a pure potential vanishes around a closed loop. Notice that
this holds even if the interior of the loop violates our potential ﬂow restriction, only the
nature of the ﬂow along the boundary curve matters. The line integral of the velocity v
taken round a closed loop is known as the circulation, and we have just demonstrated
the conditions under which it is conserved.

Calculating the rate of change of area or volume elements embedded in the ﬂow is
just a matter of repeated application of equation (13) and retaining ﬁrst order terms
in ∆t. For example, applying (13) to each of dx, dy, and dz in the volume element
expression

dV = (dx × dy)·dz

(17)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

and keeping terms linear in ∆t leads to

D(dV )

Dt

= dV ∇·v

The area element

dS = dx × dy

7

(18)

(19)

may also be treated exactly the same way, but the result is not quite as slick. It is best
to use index notation. In this case, we ﬁnd:
= dSi∂jvj − dSj∂ivj.

D(dSi)

(20)

Dt

Then, for an arbitrary vector ω,

ω· D(dS)
Dt

= (ω · dS)∇·v − [(ω·∇)v]·dS

(21)

The utility of this result becomes apparent when we consider the curl of equation (12).
We deﬁne the vorticity as ω = ∇ × v. Noting

(v·∇)v = ∇v2
2

+ (∇×v)×v,

the curl of equation (12) yields the Helmholtz vorticity equation:

∂ω
∂t

+ ∇×(ω×v) =

1

ρ2∇ρ×∇P.

(22)

(23)

As before, we restrict ourselves to constant density or barotropic ﬂow, so that the right
side of the equation vanishes. Then, expanding the left side of the equation produces

= −ω∇·v + (ω·∇)v,

Dω
Dt

(24)

whence we ﬁnd immediately

D(ω·dS)

= dS· Dω
Dt

+ ω· DdS
Dt

Dt

= 0

(25)
The content of equation (23) is that ω·dS is conserved as it moves with the ﬂow:
any change in the vorticity contribution is compensated by kinematic changes in the
projected area element. This also follows from our previous result of the circulation

(cid:72) v · dl remaining constant moving with the ﬂow and an application of Stokes’ theorem.

Note as well that equation (24) with −D ln ρ/Dt substituted for ∇·v yields

(cid:19)

·∇

(cid:18) ω

ρ

D
Dt

ω
ρ

=

v,

(26)

i.e. ω/ρ satisﬁes the same equation as the embedded line element dl, equation (14).
Thus vortex lines, normalised by the density, are in eﬀect “frozen” into the ﬂuid.

A revealing application of the Helmholtz vorticity equation is the case of time-
steady pure rotation, v = RΩeφ. Equation (23) then has only a φ component, and
simpliﬁes to

− R

∂Ω2
∂z

=

1

ρ2 (∇ρ×∇P )·eφ.

(27)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

8

A z-gradient of Ω is special. If there are no other ﬂuid motions, such a gradient can be
supported only if isobaric (constant pressure) and isochoric (constant density) surfaces
deviate from one another. If, by contrast, such surfaces coincide, then the external forces
are derivable from a gradient and Ω can only depend on R—it is constant on cylinders.
In this case, one speaks of “barotropic ﬂow.” Otherwise, if there is any z dependence
of Ω and isochores deviate from isobars, the ﬂow is said to be “baroclinic.” In stars,
a tiny oﬀset between isochoric and isobaric surfaces can produce signiﬁcant baroclinic
diﬀerential rotation, as in the Sun (cf. §9).

2.5. The Induction Equation

The addition of the magnetic ﬁeld B into the problem requires an additional equation
governing its evolution. This is provided by the Faraday induction equation

∇×E = −∂B
∂t

(28)

where E is the local electric ﬁeld in the gas. Under many circumstances of interest,
the gas is an excellent conductor (a very small ionization fraction will generally suﬃce),
but we must not set E = 0 as a consequence. Any particular ﬂuid element will be in
motion, and it is only in the local rest frame of the element that the electric ﬁeld may
be expected to vanish.‡ This means

E + v × B = 0,

(29)

where E and B refer to the “observer frame” in which the ﬂuid element has velocity
v.
(It will not have escaped the reader’s notice that this statement is the same as
requiring that the Lorentz force on individual charges must vanish.) Putting these last
two equations together by eliminating E leads to the induction equation:

= ∇ × (v × B).

∂B
∂t

(30)

The induction equation allows us to calculate the evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld. As in
our discussion of vorticity, this may be written in the alternative useful form

= −B∇ · v + (B · ∇)v.

DB
Dt

(31)

The magnetic ﬁeld follows the same equation as ω, so that once again B/ρ are material
lines, embedded in the moving ﬂuid.

In the case of purely axisymmetric rotation, v = RΩeφ, and the ﬁeld evolves

according to

whence

DBφ
Dt

= R(B · ∇)Ω,

(32)

Bφ(t) = Bφ(0) + Rt(B · ∇)Ω,

(33)
‡ Yet more carefully, we should use the rest frame of the electrons for this statement since they are
much more mobile than the ions, but we will not need to make this nice distinction here.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

9

an example of shear drawing out an azimuthal ﬁeld from a radial component. Finally,
since B is derivable from a vector potential B = ∇×A, we may “uncurl” (30) to obtain:

= v × (∇ × A) + ∇Φ

∂A
∂t

(34)

where Φ is an unspeciﬁed potential function, which may be chosen for covenience (e.g.
to eliminate ∇ · A). Expanding the cross product and switching to index notation

DAk
Dt

= vi∂kAi + ∂kΦ

Then, recalling (14),

(35)

D(dlkAk)

Dt

= dlk∂k(Φ + Aivi)

(36)
In other words, D(A · dl)/Dt integrated around a closed loop moving with the ﬂow
vanishes since it amounts to integrating a potential function over a closed path. This
is precisely analogous to our treatment of the conservation of the circulation integral.
By Stokes’ theorem (a “recurl”) B · dS must also be conserved, where dS is the area
element bounded by the closed loop, in analogy to ω · dS. Magnetic ﬂux is conserved
in exactly the same manner as vorticity is conserved.

Note the manner in which the Maxwell equations are satisﬁed. The vanishing of
the divergence of B is assured if ∇·B = 0 is an initial condition. The Faraday equation
and Biot-Savart law are already explicitly invoked in the ﬂuid equation formulation.
Finally, although the charge density computed from ∇·E is ignored in the equation of
motion, this turns out to be a second order relativistic term—the same order of smallness
that is ignored by dropping the displacement current term and using the Biot-Savart
magnetostatic limit. Thus, to ﬁrst order in the velocity (normalized to the speed of
light), the Maxwell equations are all satisﬁed.

2.6. Energy Conservation

(7),

(2),

(11), and (30) are a complete description of

The equations
ideal
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) in the sense that no additional ﬁeld equations are
required.
Individual physical processes can be added as separate terms to these
equations as needed, but as long as we treat our system as a single ﬂuid no additional
evolutionary equation is needed.
It is nevertheless valuable to have an equation
expressing the conservation of energy. Such an equation is of course not independent
from our earlier set, and can in fact be derived from this group of four by taking the
dot product of equation (11) with v and simplifying. In conservation form, it reads:

+ ρφ +

B2
2µ0

(37)

(38)

∂E
∂t

+ ∇·FE = 0,
where the energy density E is
P
γ − 1

ρv2
2

E =

+

10

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics
and the energy ﬂux FE

(cid:19)

(cid:18) ρv2

2

FE =

+

γP
γ − 1

(39)
The magnetic ﬁeld appears in FE as part of the electromagnetic Poynting ﬂux. We
have retained a thermal ﬂux F , but have ignored viscous and resistive processes as well
as external heating or cooling.

+ ρΦ

v +

B × (v × B) + F

1
µ0

In diﬀuse astrophysical gases, nonadiabatic heating and cooling processes can
operate on time scales of practical interest. We therefore introduce the net loss function
L, with dimensions of energy per second per unit mass; ρL is then the cooling per unit
volume. L is generally a function of two thermodynamic variables, ρ and T say. It is
ordinarily not a function of spatial gradients, which instead appear explicitly elsewhere
in the equations (for example, F above). On the other hand, L could include bulk
heating, for example, in the form of impulsive collisions of the thermal medium by
high energy particles. The physics of the cooling process might be electron-ion thermal
bremsstrahlung or inelastic electron-ion collisons. A typical form for L is given by

ρL = n2Λ(T ) − nΓ

(40)

where Λ depends only on the temperature of gas and details of the atomic processes
involved, and Γ is a heating rate.
In classical applications, the heating is often due
to cosmic rays, in which case it is not sensitive to the properties of the thermal gas.
The number density n could be chosen to be the electron density in an ionized gas,
or the dominant species in a predominantly neutral gas. The fact that Λ as written
depends only upon T is a reﬂection of the assumption of thermodynamic equilibrium
between the ions and electrons, a very important restriction indeed. It is often, but not
always, valid in cases of interest. We will not treat the much more complicated case of
out-of-equilibrium gases here.

Amending the entropy and energy equations to include bulk losses, we ﬁnd

(41)

(42)

and

D(ln P ρ−γ)

Dt

+ ∇·F = −ρL,

P
γ − 1
∂E
∂t

+ ∇·FE = −ρL

2.7. The Boussinesq and anelastic approximations

The Boussinesq limit, or Boussinesq approximation, is a powerful simpliﬁcation which
allows progress to be made by ﬁltering out extraneous compressive modes, generally
acoustic waves, from the system under study. It often causes confusion, however, as the
name is used in at least two diﬀerent ways. A small digression is appropriate.

The limit in which the Boussinesq approximation applies is that of constant density
everwhere, except in the buoyancy term of the equation of motion. In this case, the
equation of mass conservation reads
∇·v = 0 (Boussinesq)

(43)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

11

The reason for confusion is that the Boussinesq approximation is used, quite correctly,
in situations where the density is not constant.

To set the stage, we write the general mass conservation equation in the form



D ln ρ

Dt

+ ∇·v = 0,

(44)

where  has been inserted as a small parameter to remind us that the density changes
are, in a sense we need to make more precise, small. The density changes in this equation
might be small in the relative sense that the spatial gradients of the velocity are very
large, or in an absolute sense: the change in the relative density of a liquid is likely to be
ignorable even when the velocity gradients involve the longest global length scales. In
either case, the leading order Boussinesq approximation is that the velocity divergence
vanishes.

In its classical implementation, the Boussinesq approximation is really a Lagrangian
statement: when displaced, a ﬂuid element maintains its density. For this statement
to have any content, the background density gradient cannot be exactly zero. We can,
however, impose the condition exactly that a ﬂuid element’s density is constant. A
vertical salinity gradient in seawater, for example, will give rise to a very small density
gradient, say ρ(cid:48)(z). Then, a strictly vertical displacement ξ of a ﬂuid element will
produce a density change relative to the element’s new surroundings of δρ = −ξρ(cid:48). The
displacement creates a buoyancy force

δρ

ρ2 P (cid:48)(z)

where P (cid:48) is the background pressure gradient due to the presence of a gravitational
accleration g, P (cid:48) = −ρg. (Here and above ρ is treated as an approximate constant.)
Thus, the equation of motion for ξ is

¨ξ =

gρ(cid:48)
ρ

ξ

(45)
With ρ(cid:48) < 0, this gives rise to buoyant oscillations with an oscillation frequency
ω2 = −gρ(cid:48)/ρ (Lighthill 1978). When heated from below, a ﬂuid may locally invert
the sign of ρ(cid:48), in which case ω2 < 0 and unstable thermal convection ensues.

There is an appealing internal consistency in this example: Dρ/Dt is set to zero,
which is “as it should be” if ∇·v = 0.
In astrophysical settings, gas dynamical
considerations prevail, not liquid water, and Dρ/Dt is clearly not a vanishing quantity.
Instead it is the entropy S that is modelled as strictly conserved with moving ﬂuid
elements in the rigorous adiabatic limit Dσ/Dt = 0, where σ = ln P ρ−γ. How then,
may we justify the constraint ∇·v = 0?

The answer is more WKB (named for physicists Wentzel , Kramers, and Brillouin)
than Boussinesq in spirit, though the vanishing velocity divergence condition is often
informally referred to in the astrophysical literature as “Boussinesq.” The often-made
WKB approximatation consists of assuming that over the scale of a perturbation, the
change in the background quantities is negligible. This is also referred to as the local

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

12

approximation. The point is that the combination of a very small perturbation length
scale and a long time scale leads to a vanishing velocity divergence, but only to leading
order. D ln ρ/Dt should then be interpreted as the error incurred.

Moreover, displaced ﬂuid elements remain very nearly in pressure equilibrium,
diﬀering only to the extent that the (very short) sound crossing time over a wavelength
is comparable to other times of interest. Relative pressure perturbations may be thus be
ignored compared with relative density perturbations, and then the adiabatic constraint
becomes γδρ = ξρσ(cid:48). The frequency of oscillation emerges as ω2 = −gσ(cid:48)/γ, a quantity
known as the Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a frequency. We recover the classical Boussinesq limit by
letting γ → ∞.

What might be done to eliminate acoustic oscillations if the background equilibrium
density is very strongly stratiﬁed in position, as is often the case in stars? One approach,
known as the anelastic approximation is equivalent to the mass conservation asymptotic
regime

+ ∇·(ρv) = 0.



∂ρ
∂t

(46)

Note the diﬀerence with equation (44): there the Lagrangian change was regarded as
small, here it is the explicit Eulerian time dependence that is small. The anelastic
approximation amounts to writing

ρ(x, t) = ρ0(x) + ρ1(x, t)

and regarding the leading order mass conservation equation as

∇·(ρ0v) = 0.

(47)

(48)

The spatial dependence of ρ0 is of course retained. The anelastic approximation is used
extensively in simulations of the convective zone in the Sun (Thompson et al. 2003)
and other stars.

The foundations of the anelastic approximation are less ﬁrm than those of the
Boussinesq limit, however. When is the velocity large enough to justify dropping the lead
time derivative? The velocity ﬁeld may itself be linear in ρ1/ρ0. Moreover, it has recently
been pointed out that the standard anelastic approximation, lacking the density time
derivative, is not consistent with an energy conservation formulation. Eﬀorts continue as
of this writing to include modiﬁcations to render the anelastic approximation compatible
with this requirement (e.g. Brown, Vasil, & Zweibel 2012).

Throughout this paper we will work, when needed, in the Boussinesq ∇·v = 0

limit, appropriate to large wavenumber disturbances in a stratiﬁed background.

3. Thermal conduction–electrostatic analogy

3.1. Preliminaries

A common astrophysical environment
involves high density gas concentrations
embedded within a more diﬀuse medium. (Interstellar gas is a good example of this sort

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

13

of “cloudy medium.”) If the high density clouds are in approximate pressure equilibrium
with their environment, they must be cool relative to the warmer conﬁning gas. Heat
will diﬀuse towards the cloud surface by thermal conduction from the hot surroundings,
and if the clouds are small, the concentrated ﬂux will evaporate the surface layers. The
outer layer will heat faster than it is able to cool. It must then expand, and ﬂow outward
in a wind. (See ﬁgure [1].) An analogous process has been studied in tokamaks: pellets
containing a deuterium-tritium ice are ablated by laser heating, and the evaporative
outﬂow in principle causes the pellet to implode (Mayer 1982).

We begin with the calculation of the mass loss rate ˙m from an isolated spherical
cloud of radius R immersed in a hot gas at a given ambient temperature (Cowie &
McKee 1977). In its simplest form, the heat ﬂux F is given by (Spitzer 1962)

F = −κ∇Te,

(49)

where Te is the electron temperature and κ is the thermal conductivity coeﬃcient, itself
highly temperature dependent:
κ (cid:39) 6 × 10−7T 5/2

(50)
The units of κ are erg cm−1 s−1 K−1. (Note, because of the specialised nature of the
material, in this section only we will use cgs and esu units.)

e

The evaporation rate from a spherical cloud in an ambient gas at temperature Th
was ﬁrst worked out by Cowie and McKee (1977). Gravity is negligible in this problem.
If the heat ﬂux is given by this simple diﬀusion approximation, the evaporation rate is

˙m =

16πκhµR

25kB

(51)

where κh = κ(Th) is the value of the thermal conductivity coeﬃcient in the ambient gas,
µ is the mean mass per particle, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. Note the interesting
result that the rate is not proportional to the surface area presented by the cloud, as
one might naively expect, but to the radius. There is a deep and interesting reason for
this on which we shall have much to say in the next subsection.

The precise numerical prefactor in equation (51) depends upon the assumption of
a spherical cloud (which is of course an idealization) and the fact that the thermal
conductivity due to Coulomb collisions is proportional to the temperature T to the
5/2 power. The origin of this particular value is not diﬃcult to understand. The
characteristic length at which the kinetic and potential energies of two electrons are
equal is rc ∼ e2/kBT , where e is the electron charge. The Coulomb cross section
(∼ πr2
c ) will then have a 1/T 2 dependence, and the mean free path λee should then scale
as T 2/ne, where ne is the number density of electrons. The diﬀusion of the heat ﬂux in
the small mean free path limit is proportional to

(mene)ceλee∇c2

e ∝ T 5/2√
me

∇T

(52)

where c2
e = kBT /me is the square of the electron thermal velocity. This shows the origin
of the 5/2 power and justiﬁes the assumption that the electrons are the heat carrying
population—at least when the electron and ion temperatures are equal.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

14

Figure 1. A schematic diagram of an evaporating cold cloud, embedded in a hot
diﬀuse medium. Heat ﬂows from the medium into the cloud, causing the outer cloud
layers to heat up, expand, and ﬂow outwards in an evaporative wind.

The precise calculation of the thermal conductivity coeﬃcient κ in an ionized gas is
by no means simple, involving a detailed kinetic treatment of the electron distribution
function and delicate handling of a logarithmically-divergent integral (the ‘Coulomb
logarithm’) in the course of calculating the scattering cross section. The problem was
worked out in complete detail in the 1950s by Lyman Spitzer and his colleagues (Spitzer
1962). For our purposes, it will suﬃce to use equation (50). (This number actually has
a very weak temperature and density dependence stemming from a formal “Coulomb-
logarithm” term. The value selected in equation (50) is appropriate for most dilute
astrophysical plasmas.)

3.2. Mass loss as capacitance

Even with a nonlinear temperature dependence, the thermal evaporation problem can
be cast in a form in which it is entirely analogous to classical electrostatics. This is our
ﬁrst surprise, and it is a pleasant one, for we may then bring to bear on evaporation
problems a powerful mathematical formalism and an intuition honed from electrostatic
potential theory. In particular, it will be shown that T 5/2 satisﬁes the Laplace equation,
and the mass loss rate of equation (51) is equal to known constants times the formal
geometrical capacitance of the evaporating cloud (e.g., the radius R for a sphere, 2R/π
for a thin disc). Let us see how this arises.

Consider a two-phase medium, with cool high density clouds embedded in a hot

!Hot/diffuse!Cold!/dense!Expansion!velocity!vr!Heat!flux!F!Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

15

substrate. The hotter diﬀuse gas is in pressure equilibrium with the clouds. Heat is
diﬀused by thermal conduction into the clouds, which “evaporate” as a consequence.
The evaporation is described by a total mass loss rate from the initial spherical cloud
surface,

˙m = 4πR2ρ(R)vr(R),

(53)

a quantity that in steady-state remains constant throughout the ﬂow. We assume
that the ﬂow is highly subsonic so that the dominant balance is one between the
thermal energy ﬂux and thermal conduction ﬂux. The energy equation (37) under
these circumstances reduces to

∇·

v − χT 5/2∇T

= 0

(54)

(cid:18)5P

2

(cid:19)

where χ = κ/T 5/2 and the pressure P may both be regarded as constant. This is
equivalent to

v =

2χ
5P

T 5/2∇T + ∇×α

where α is an arbitrary vector ﬁeld.

(55)

For irrotational ﬂow ω = 0, α may be ignored, and the velocity follows the
temperature gradient. This is a well-posed mathematical problem.
Imposing the
constraint of a vanishing mass ﬂux divergence in (54) and assuming an ideal gas equation
of state, the temperature T then satisﬁes a remarkably simple equation (Balbus 1985):

∇2T 5/2 = 0

(56)

A unique solution is obtained by specifying the temperature in the ambient gas (i.e.,
at “inﬁnity”) and on each cloud. These are classical Dirichlet boundary conditions.
Clearly, T 5/2 must be proportional to the electrostatic potential Φ in this analogy. The
constant of proportionality is set by demanding that the electric ﬁeld analogue −∇Φ
be our mass ﬂux:

ρv =

4µχ
25kB

∇T 5/2 ≡ −∇Φ

(57)

where kB is the Boltzmann constant and m the mean mass per particle. Hence,

Φ = − 4µχ
25kB

T 5/2

(58)
If we now use the analogue of Gauss’ Law (“the integral of E · dS over a closed surface
is 4π times the enclosed change”), then
ρv·dS = 4πC∆Φ

(cid:90)

˙m =

(59)

where we have represented the enclosed charge as the product of the capacitance C
and the potential diﬀerence ∆Φ between the common ground of the cloud surfaces and
inﬁnity. (The clouds are all supposed to be cold, or at zero common potential, relative

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

16

to the hot surroundings.) Thus, with Th the temperature of the hot gas far from the
clouds,

∆Φ =

4µχ
25kB

T 5/2
h

,

hence (Balbus 1985),

˙m =

16πµχC

25kB

T 5/2
h

(60)

(61)

As for C, this must be the electrostatic capacitance of ... exactly what?

By way of an answer, note that in contrast to our potential and electric ﬁeld, C
is not some mathematical analogue quantity, it really is the actual capacitance in esu
units, a length. We are, in eﬀect, solving the standard Dirichlet problem of a system of
conductors with speciﬁed surface potentials (all zero in this case) and given potential at
inﬁnity. If we were calculating the evaporation of a lone spherical cloud, for example,
then C = R, the cloud radius (Cowie & McKee 1977). Then the result (61) for ˙m is
exactly the expression (51). But why should we limit ourselves to a single evaporating
spherical cloud? What about a hemispherical shell of radius R? Then, C = R(1/2+1/π).
Two spherical clouds of radius R in contact? C = 2R ln 2.

While one can look up the esu capacitance for any particular shape in a compiled
table and thereby determine how rapidly the corresponding gas cloud would evaporate
(e.g. Smythe & Yeh 1972), the real value of equation (61) is not this handy convenience.
It is the more general insight that T 5/2 and ˙m behave respectively as a potential and a
capacitance in complex systems percolating with clouds.

3.3. Evaporation in a Cloudy Medium

One consequence of the electrostatic analogy is the remarkable (and generally
unappreciated) Faraday cage behaviour of a cloudy medium. Just as a Faraday cage
can shield its interior from external ﬁelds when the cage wires cover only a tiny fraction
of the eﬀective surface, a very low ﬁlling factor of clouds in a two-phase medium will
profoundly aﬀect the system’s thermal behaviour. The easiest way to compute this
eﬀect is to imagine the mathematically equivalent but reverse problem of hot spherical
clouds (radius R, temperature Th) embedded in a cold T = 0 medium. An isolated
cloud would exhibit the “monopole” temperature proﬁle

T 5/2(r) =

T 5/2
h R
r

(62)

When does the assumption of isolation break down? It breaks down when, at a typical
cloud’s surface, the superposed contribution from all other clouds results in a net
augmentation of T 5/2 that is comparable to T 5/2

.

h

Consider a spherical medium of radius X which is actually comprised of individual
embedded spherical clouds, each of radius R. The volume fraction of the medium ﬁlled
by clouds, hereafter the “ﬁlling factor,” is f . Then, the number of clouds per unit

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

17

volume is 3f /4πR3. The condition for a cloud near the center of the system to be
marginally isolated from the other clouds may then be deﬁned as

(cid:90) X

(63)

(64)

(65)

4πr2 (3f /4πR3) (R/r) dr = 1

or

0

f = 2R2/3X 2

(sphere)

The same calculation for a gross slab of vertical thickness h and radius X gives

f = 2R2/3Xh (slab)

These are much more stringent criteria than the naive guess f (cid:28) 1!
in
most astrophysical applications they are far from satisﬁed. We are facing a sort of
“Olbers paradox”, in which the superposed small eﬀects from numerous distant sources
overwhelms the local contribution.

Indeed,

What are the consequences of this? The primary physical consequence is that if cool
clouds are evaporating into a hot medium at temperature Th, the process unfolds in two
stages. The ﬁrst is evaporation from the clouds into a local intercloud medium with a
temperature at some value intermediate between the cool cloud temperature (eﬀectively
zero) and Th. Let us call this temperature TI. The potential function T 5/2
in our
electrostatic analogy cannot obtain an extremal value in the interior of its domain since
it satisﬁes the Laplace equation. Accordingly, we expect little variation in TI within this
intercloud region. The second stage of the evaporation is that this intercloud medium at
temperature TI is heated by an extended hot phase at temperature Th, driving a large
scale evaporative outﬂow. (See ﬁgure 2.)

I

The total change in the temperature potential T 5/2 is the change going from the
in the immediate intercloud medium, and thence to
. In terms of the system capacitance Cs of the ensemble of clouds and the gross

clouds T 5/2 = 0 to T 5/2 = T 5/2
T 5/2
h
capacitance Cg of the large scale shape assumed by the ensemble,

I

˙m
Cs

=

˙mc
R

+

˙m
Cg

(66)

where ˙mc is the evaporation rate of an individual cloud. But if N is the total number
of clouds, then N ˙mc = ˙m since mass is conserved. Hence

1
Cs

=

1

N R

+

1
Cg

(67)

the individual cloud
As though they were components in a laboratory circuit,
capacitances ﬁrst add in parallel, then in series with a capacitance Cg.
(Note: this
is unlike resistors!) Expressed in terms of the ﬁlling factor f and gross system volume
V , Cs is thus given by

Cs =

Cg

1 + 4πR2Cg/(3f V )

For the speciﬁc case of the gross slab geometry we introduced above,

Cs =

2π/X

1 + 8R2/(3πf Xh)

(68)

(69)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

18

Figure 2. A schematic diagram of an ensemble of cold clouds surrounded by an
intermediate temperature gas and a hot ambient medium. This is represented by
an electric circuit component on the right (for 3 “clouds”). The total geometrical
capacitance of the system is given by the sum of the capacitances CC of the cold
clouds as though they were in parallel (N CC for N clouds), added to the geometrical
capacitance of the intermediate temperature region CI of the ensemble as though it
were in series (1/N CC + 1/CI ).

As a practical matter, an astrophysical cloudy medium in (say) the disc of a galaxy,
would evaporate in a very hot gas as though there were no clouds at all, as if the entire
disc were a continuum of gas (Cs (cid:39) Cg). This is the ﬁrst surprise. The second surprise
is that radiative losses, which are often unimportant when considering the thermal
evaporation of a single cloud, make a great impact on the cloudy medium problem—one
that is still not well understood.

The intermediate temperature TI may be determined by mass conservation: the
total mass evaporation rate from all the clouds into the gas at T = TI must equal the
evaporation rate from TI into the gas at T = Th. If there are total of N spherical clouds
in our system, then

N RT 5/2

I = CsT 5/2

h

.

(70)

Once again, we consider a slab galaxy with a cloudy medium. Using Cs = 2X/π, the
intermediate temperature gas has a temperature of

(cid:20) 8R2

(cid:21)2/5

Th

TI =

3πf Xh

(71)
Typical values might be 1 pc for R, 2×104 pc for X, 100 pc for h, and 10−2 for f . With a
hot gas temperature of Th = 108 K expected for the intracluster medium of a rich X-ray
cluster, TI is a few million degrees. While this value ﬁts nicely into the intermediate
asymptotic regime which is both very large compared with the cloud temperature and
very small compared with Th, it is not a temperature regime that can maintain itself
for long: radiative losses generally cannot be oﬀset by conductive heating.

!Th!TI!1!!"!#$=1!"!+1!!!Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

19

We return once again to our canonical evaporation problem of a slab of clouds
immersed in a very hot gas at Th = 108 K, a disc galaxy in a hot intracluster medium.
The clouds start to evaporate as per above, rapidly driving the hot gas out of immediate
contact with the clouds, replacing it with gas at T = TI ∼ 106 K. Thus far, all is well.
But now the 106 degree gas starts to cool (by thermal bremsstrahlung and atomic
collisions) more rapidly than it evaporates. Our solution is not quite self-consistent: the
TI gas loses pressure support as it cools, and the ambient Th gas re-enters the galaxy!
This now creates fresh TI gas, and our problem simply repeats.

The problem seems to be intrinsically time-dependent, and it is yet to be solved in
any quantitative sense. The most likely scenario is one in which after an initial transient
(assuming the clouds do not all evaporate), the gas settles into an evolving outwardly-
moving, mass-loaded (because of ongoing evaporation), cooling conduction front. How
such a system would manifest itself observationally is an interesting astrophysical
question.

The surprises here are several. A seemingly complicated problem (the thermal
evaporation of many clouds at once) turns out at ﬁrst to be simple (ordinary
electrostatics) but in the end complicated again (because of radiation eﬀects). But
the key insight that ﬂows from clouds have important long range interactions even at
low ﬁlling factors is one that is very likely to survive beyond the idealizations we have
adopted here.

4. Thermal Instability

4.1. Preliminaries

A fascinating and important property of a gas subject to bulk heating and cooling is the
tendency for its thermodynamic behaviour to be unstable. The underlying cause is easy
to understand. Imagine a slightly overdense region embedded in pressure equilibrium
in a surrounding gas. The increased density leads to a higher collision rate among the
constituent gas particles, which in turn leads to a higher rate of thermal energy loss.
If this enhanced loss prevails over any corresponding enhanced heating (as it generally
does: heating depends less sensitively on the density), the overdense region becomes
yet more dense as it is compressed by the surrounding medium. The losses become yet
more rapid and the process runs away.

This notion was ﬁrst put on a quantitative footing by Field (1965). In terms of
the radiative loss function L, Field showed that the thermal instability in the manner
descibed above occurs when

< 0.

(72)

(cid:18) ∂L

(cid:19)

∂T

P

In retrospect, this is a rather obvious mathematical rephrasing of the physical description
that preceeds the equation. Note the crucial point that the temperature derivative must
be taken with the pressure P held constant; the loss function is more naturally given

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

20

as a function of density ρ and temperature T . Fixing P in the temperature derivative
reﬂects the constant pressure conditions imposed by the ambient medium.

But are matters really so simple? After all, astrophysical gases do not, in general,
pervade the universe homogeneously. Rather, they are trapped and held in gravitational
potential wells. Under such conditions, an overdensity will not stay put as it grows, it
will fall down, like all heavy objects, in the direction the gravitational ﬁeld is pointing!
As it falls, the element of ﬂuid does not keep its pressure ﬁxed, the pressure grows to
match that of the surrounding ﬂuid at lower depths. Indeed, the growing pressure can
squeeze the element and adiabatically heat it to the point at which the element becomes
warmer and thus less dense than the nonadiabatic surroundings. We now no longer have
an overdensity, we have an underdensity that will rise back up in the opposite direction
of the gravitational ﬁeld. In other words, the thermal instability is trying to play out
in a ﬂuid element that is actually undergoing buoyant oscillations in the gas. These
oscillations will generally be more rapid than the timescale associated with the cooling,
so to leading order it is the entropy S of the ﬂuid element that remains constant as the
ﬂuid element evolves, not the pressure P ! Should our criterion be

< 0

(73)

(cid:18) ∂L

(cid:19)

∂T

S

for instability? This is a very diﬀerent, and in practice much more diﬃcult, inequality
to satisfy. The surprises begin.

Suppose, for example that the cooling function had the canonical form

L = A ρT d − B,

(74)

where A and B are constants and d is a positive real number less than but of order

unity. Then (cid:18) ∂L
(cid:18) ∂L

∂T

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

P

∂T

S

= (d − 1)AρT d−1 < 0.

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

But with the entropy S held constant,

=

d +

1

γ − 1

AρT d−1 > 0.

(75)

(76)

The two results are clearly inconsistent with one another.

To confuse the issue thoroughly, we oﬀer the following plausible argument (Defouw
1970), which suggests that we had the criterion correct the ﬁrst time, in equation
(72). Consider a convectively stable oscillating ﬂuid element at the peak of its upward
(against the sense of the gravitational ﬁeld) displacement. As before, it is in pressure
equilibrium with its surroundings. Assume that the buoyant oscillations are growing in
amplitude with time, due to thermal instability. Then, cooling at the maximum upward
displacement will be enhanced relative to the equilibrium L = 0 ambient surroundings.
But the element’s temperature T must be less than the surroundings, consistent with
the sense of the downward buoyant force on this phase of the oscillation. Imagine now
crossing from the ambient medium into the ﬂuid element along an isobar (constant P ).

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics
21
The change in L will be positive, the change in T negative. In other words, equation
(72) must be satisﬁed for thermal instability, even when the instability is actually an
oscillating overstability.

So what is going on here? The problem is the tacit assumption of the existence of
convectively stable buoyant oscillations, independently of whether Field-style thermal
instability is present or not. The surprise is that this assumption is incorrect.

4.2. Eulerian and Lagrangian Perturbations

4.2.1. A useful digression. To probe more deeply, we need to sharpen the distinction
between perturbations aﬀecting a particular ﬂuid element, and perturbations referring
to a particular spatial location. The former are Lagrangian perturbations, the latter are
Eulerian perturbations (Lynden-Bell & Ostriker 1967, Shapiro & Teukolsky 1983). Let
ξ(r, t) be the vector ﬁeld representing the displacement length of a ﬂuid element located
at r in equilibrium, i.e. the displaced ﬂuid element is located at r +ξ. The displacement
is considered to be small compared with all scale heights of interest. To be deﬁnite, we
work here with the cooling function L, but the results apply to any ﬂow quantity of
interest, including vector ﬁeld components. The equilibrium cooling function will be
denoted simply as L, the perturbed cooling function as L(cid:48). The Eulerian change in L,
denoted δL, is

L(cid:48)(r, t) − L(r) ≡ δL

(77)

The Lagrangian change in the L, denoted ∆L, is then, to leading order in ξ:

L(cid:48)(r + ξ, t) − L(r) ≡ ∆L = L(cid:48)(r, t) − L(r) + (ξ·∇)L = δL + (ξ·∇)L(78)
where in the ﬁnal term we have used the equilibrium L, the distinction with L(cid:48)
introducing only higher order corrections. Abstracting the key equality from the above,

∆L = δL + (ξ·∇)L

(79)

our fundamental relation between Lagrangian and Eulerian perturbations. We will use
this deﬁnition for both scalar and vector functions alike, taking care to include any unit
vectors in the ξ · ∇ derivative.

What is the relationship between between the Eulerian radial velocity disturbance
δv and the Lagrangian change ∆v? Here some care is needed. The Lagrangian change
of the velocity ﬁeld δv is by deﬁnition the diﬀerence between the time derivative
of the displacement of a perturbed element and its unperturbed counterpart,
i.e.
∆v = Dξ/Dt. Hence,
≡ ∂ξ
∂t

+ (v·∇)ξ = δv + (ξ · ∇)v,

Dξ
Dt

(80)

the latter equality following from (79). In other words,

δv =

∂ξ
∂t

+ (v·∇)ξ − (ξ · ∇)v,

an important result.

(81)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

22

To illustrate the power of the Lagrangian approach as well as to derive some
powerful equations that we shall use throughout this work, consider the equations of
mass conservation, (adiabatic) entropy conservation, and the MHD induction equation
of a perfect conductor. These are all of the form

∂Q
∂t

= L(v)

(82)

where Q is a non-velocity ﬂow attribute, and the operator L is linear in the velocity v,
and independent of time derivatives. In equilibrium, which of course need not be static,
L(v) = 0. Both Q and L may be either scalar or vector quantities.

Imagine continuously deforming an equilibrium solution, altering the structural
variables (i.e., pressure, density, magnetic ﬁeld) by adding a ﬁnite velocity ﬁeld w (not
necessarily small compared with v) to the unperturbed velocity v, then tabulating the
brief evolution over an inﬁnitesimal time interval δt. This will normally cause a small
change in Q, as per the governing equation (82). Since the partial derivative ∂Q/∂t
is Eulerian, taken at a ﬁxed spatial location, it may equally well be regarded as the
Eulerian change δQ induced by the deformation, divided by the interval δt. Using the
fact that L(v) = 0, and that L is linear in the velocity and free of time derivatives,

δQ = [L(v + w)]δt = [L(v)+L(w)]δt = 0+L(w) δt = L(w δt) = L(ξ)(83)
where ξ ≡ wδt is the inﬁnitesimal displacement of a ﬂuid element associated with the
continuous deformation. From this general result follows three equations of constraint,
in the sense that they display no explicit time evolution, but instead embody the
Lagrangian conservation of mass, entropy, and magnetic ﬂux. The relations allow a
direct calculation of the Eulerian changes associated with ﬂuid displacements:

= −ξ·∇ ln P ρ−γ,

(84)

(85)

(86)

(cid:18) δP

δρ = −∇·(ρξ)
δ ln P ρ−γ ≡
δB = ∇×(ξ×B).

P

(cid:19)

− γ

δρ
ρ

These may also be derived directly from the fundamental equations and the deﬁnitions
of Eulerian and Lagrangian perturbations, but with considerably more eﬀort.

In this work, we will be working in the WKB limit of local plane wave behaviour
exp(ik · r), with |k| large compared with reciprocal equilibrium scale heights. We will
also exclude acoustic disturbances by working in the Boussinesq limit, meaning here
that the terms comprising the ∇ · ξ divergence are large compared with ξ · ∇ρ in (84).
This also means that disturbances are very close to pressure equilibrium with their
surroundings, so that δ ln P may be neglected in comparison with δ ln ρ.§ The pressure
balance argument should include a contribution from the magnetic ﬁeld as well, but
our interest will be in those cases in which the magnetic ﬁeld is suﬃciently weak that
its pressure contrbuition may be ignored—but not its tension. (An explicit exception
§ Formal veriﬁcation of this claim requires consideration of the dynamical equation of motion.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics
23
to this restriction is the Newcomb-Parker problem, §6.) To leading order, our three
equations then simplify to
∇ · ξ = 0,
δρ
ρ
δB = i(k · B)ξ

ξ·∇ ln P ρ−γ

(87)

(88)

(89)

=

1
γ

These three equations of constraint are extremely useful across a wide variety of ﬂuid
problems.

4.3. When does thermal instability mean convective instability?

We return to the problem at hand. For a medium whose equilibrium cooling is described
by L = 0, the distinction between δL and ∆L is lost, and it is an interesting fact that
the earlier considerations presented above may now be distilled to a single apparently
trivial equation:

(∆L)S = (δL)P .

(90)

What this says is the following. Follow a local ﬂuid element (a “blob”),
initially
in an L = 0 state, remaining in pressure equilibrium with its surroundings, on its
adiabatic upward displacement. (As before, “upward” means against gravity. Downward
displacements work too.) Once displaced, the blob’s local thermodynamic variables no
longer satisfy L = 0; there is some ∆L. But ∆L due to this adiabatic displacement
must be the same change in L that would be found by crossing from the immediate
surrounding undisturbed L = 0 medium (at the same pressure) into the displaced ﬂuid
element. By either the Lagrangian adiabatic or Eulerian isobaric route, we start at
L = 0 and end up in the same blob with the same new value of L. From this obvious
little equation follows everything.
Equation (90) may be written

(cid:18) ∂L

(cid:19)

∂T

S

(cid:18) ∂L

(cid:19)

∆T

= δT

For an adiabatic displacement,
(γ − 1)

=

∆T
T

1
γ

∆P
P

∂T

P

(γ − 1)

≡ 1
γ

(cid:18) δP

P

(cid:19)

,

+ ξ

∂ ln P

∂r

(91)

(92)

where ξ is the radial component of the displacement.
background is spherically symmetric in radius r.) Thus, since δP = 0,

(We are assuming that the

∆T
T

=

ξ
γ

(γ − 1)

∂ ln P

∂r

.

On the other hand,
≡ ∆T
T

δT
T

− ξ

∂ ln T

∂r

(93)

(94)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics
Putting the last two equations together with d ln T = d ln P − d ln ρ,

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

δT
T

= ξ

− 1
γ

∂ ln P

∂ ln ρ

When used in (91), equations (93) and (95) lead to
∂ ln P ρ−γ

∂ ln P

− (γ − 1)

∂r

(cid:19)

=

S

+

∂r

(cid:18) ∂L
(cid:19)

∂T

=

∂r

(cid:18) ∂L

(cid:19)

P

(cid:18) ∂L
(cid:19)

∂T

∂r

(cid:18) ∂L

(γ − 1)

g
c2
S

∂ ln P ρ−γ

∂T

S

∂r

∂T

P

24

(95)

(96)

(97)

Finally, assuming the medium is in hydrostatic equilibrium with a gravitational ﬁeld g
satisfying −ρg = ∂P/∂r, our equation becomes

where c2
S = P/ρ is the square of the isothermal sound speed. This remarkable equation
states that if the adiabatic temperature gradient of L with respect to T is positive,
as is almost always the case for any astrophysical loss function, the corresponding
thermodynamic isobaric temperature gradient must have the same sign as the spatial
gradient of the entropy!
In particular the Field criterion, which requires a negative
isobaric temperature gradient for thermal instability, will always be accompanied by
a negative spatial gradient of the speciﬁc entropy. The latter is a prescription for
convective instability, normally a much more rapidly growing disruption than a simple
thermal stability.

Now here is a nice surprise: were we to try to construct an atmosphere in both
hydrostatic and thermal equilibrium subject to bulk heating and cooling, then for
realistic thermal loss functions, classic thermal instability would not occur without
a simultaneous, much more disruptive, convective instability.
In this case, thermal
runaway is an afterthought to adiabatic heating and cooling. Rising convective plumes
are warm relative to their surroundings and are simply made warmer by unbalanced
external heating; the same holds in reverse for descending cool parcels.

This resolves the immediate puzzle: we should not have tried to analyze a simple
thermal instability in a gas in both hydrostatic and thermal equilibrium under the
assumption that there were simple buoyant oscillations present. But the surprises, as
we shall presently see, are only just beginning.

4.4. Cooling in a cooling medium

Although the problem we analyzed in the previous section was well-posed and physically
sensible, in realistic astrophysical settings there are seemingly slight diﬀerences from our
idealization that in fact profoundly aﬀect the thermal behaviour of the gas. What
is the fate, for example, of a gas that is cooling without a signiﬁcant heat source
present? This is an interesting question because a typical astrophysical environment
will be characterized by a thermal cooling time much longer than a dynamical sound
crossing times: as it cools, the gas passes from one state of hydrostatic equilibrium to
another. (This is similar to the notion of individual ﬂuid elements passing from one

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

25

state of collisional thermal equilibrium to another in ﬂow.) At one time (e.g. Cowie
& Binney 1977), this was a simple standard model for the very hot X-ray emitting gas
one ﬁnds cradled within the potential of a megaparsec scale cluster of galaxies, though
current models of the cluster tend to be far more complex.
(This almost certainly
means there is something important still missing in our understanding of the dynamics.)
The question then arises of the stability of the bulk cooling process. Even using what
we’ve just learned, this is a surprisingly tricky problem, as the cooling instability time
scale and the background ﬂow time scale are comparable. This is analogous to the
classical cosmology problem of linear perturbations growing by gravitational instabilty
in a critical Friedmann universe.

4.4.1. Equilibrium cooling The equations governing the unperturbed ﬂow, taken to be
spherical, are (i) mass conservation:

˙m = 4πρr2v = constant

(98)

where the equilibrium velocity is v = ver; note that both ˙m and v will be negative for
inﬂow. Next, we impose (ii) hydrostatic equilibrium:

= −ρg

dP
dr

(99)
where −g is the radial gravitational ﬁeld. Finally, we require (iii) the entropy loss
equation without a heating term in L:
= −ρL

d ln P ρ−γ

(100)

P v
γ − 1

dr

In fact, these equations do not represent a rigorous global equilibrium (a ﬁnite amount
of material eventually collapses to the origin r = 0), but rather an extended quasi-static
phase of a slowly cooling atmosphere.

4.4.2. Cooling disturbances. To understand the growth of local disturbances in this
inﬂowing gas, we will follow the cosmologists and work in a comoving, Lagrangian
coordinate frame. The transformation between a small physical radial separation δr, and
the separation represented in local comoving coordinates, δr(cid:48), in which radial stretching
caused by the inﬂow does not appear, is given by:

where we take a to be a function of r(cid:48) and t. This is equivalent to deﬁning a by

δr = aδr(cid:48).

(cid:18) ∂r

(cid:19)

∂r(cid:48)

,

t

a =

(101)

(102)

The radial scale of the perturbations is taken to be much smaller than the global scales of
the problem, so that while a in general would depend on t and r(cid:48), in a small Lagrangian
neighbourhood r(cid:48) +  around our ﬂuid element, with no restrictions on t, a may sensibly
be written as a(t). Equation (14) then tells us

D(δr)

Dt

= δr

dvr
dr

(103)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

or using (102)

dvr
dr

=

1
a

Da
Dt

26

(104)

The idea is that while the original equations are written in terms of the usual r
spatial coordinates, it is only in small neighbourhoods of these embedded comoving
r(cid:48) coordinates that the displacement perturbations exhibit a simple WKB plane wave
form. A “local” calculation is truly local only in these coordinates. If (say) the radial
displacement ξr has a spatial dependence ∼ exp(ik(cid:48)r(cid:48)), with k(cid:48) independent of time in
these Lagrangian coordinates, and k(cid:48)r(cid:48) (cid:29) 1, then

∂
∂r

=

∂r(cid:48)
∂r

∂
∂r(cid:48) =

ik(cid:48)
a

(105)

The wavenumber is, in eﬀect, frozen into the ﬂow expansion. Note as well that (104)
implies

Dvr
Dt

= vr

dvr
dr

=

vr
a

Da
Dt

,

so that a is linearly proportional to the the velocity vr.

(106)

4.4.3. Linear dynamical response The perturbed dynamical equation of motion is

Dδv
Dt

+ (δv·∇)v = − 1
ρ

∇δP +

δρ

ρ2 ∇P

Now, the r component of the left side of this equation is

Dδvr
Dt

+ δvr

dvr
dr

=

1
a

Daδvr

Dt

,

(107)

(108)

where we have used (104). A similar expression emerges for the angular component of
δv, denoted δvang, but with r replacing a. Now the left side of the angular part of the
equation of motion becomes

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

1
r

D(rδvang)

Dt

=

1
r

D
Dt

r2 D(ξang/r)

Dt

(109)

where the ﬁnal equality is aided by the angular component of equation (80). We note
that only if there is a change in the ratio of the angular displacement relative to r is
there a true change in the angular velocity at a particular location, a sensible result.

To make further progress, we need to specify our perturbations more precisely. We

will use spheroidal perturbations of the form
δv = δvYlmer + R(r)∇angYlm

(110)

where Ylm is the usual spherical harmonic function of colatitude θ and azimuth φ, and
∇ang is a vector operator whose components are the angular components of the standard
∇ gradient. The quantities δv and R are r-dependent amplitudes of the Ylm and their
angular gradients. These should not be confused with δvr and δvang, the full vector
components depending on r, θ, and φ. The use of spherical harmonics here is useful to
display the 1/r dependence explicitly in the angular structure, because ﬂuid elements
may traverse an extended distance in radius over the course of the calculation.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

Note that

∇·δv =

(cid:20) 1

∂r2δv

r2

∂r

(cid:21)
− l(l + 1)
r2 R

Ylm

27

(111)

Upon integration over angles, the angular equation of motion takes the compact form

D
Dt

(YlmR) = −δP
ρ

(112)
Finally, we use the standard Boussinesq approximation ∇·δv (cid:39) 0 to eliminate sound
waves. The previous two equations lead immediately to

.

D
Dt

∂r2δv

∂r

= −δP
ρ

.

(113)

Using this in the radial equation of motion (108) (to eliminate δP ), together with the
large wavenumber approximation, we ﬁnd that upon grouping terms,

(cid:19)

(cid:18) Ylm
(cid:18)

l(l + 1)

D
Dt
which deﬁnes the geometrical parameter β ≤ 1.

a2l(l + 1)

≡ 1
a

D
Dt

aδvr

1 +

1
a

k2r2

= −δρ
ρ

g

(114)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)aδvr

(cid:19)

β2

D
Dt

(cid:18) δP
(cid:20) ∂(ρL/P )

P

(cid:21)

− γ

δρ
ρ

(cid:19)
(cid:18) ∂Θ

+δvr

(cid:19)

≡

4.4.4. Linear thermal response Our ﬁnal step begins with the linearly perturbed
entropy equation,

d ln P ρ−γ

dr

= −(γ−1)

T ΘT|P +

δP
P

P ΘP|T

(115)

(cid:18) δT

T

(cid:19)

where T is the gas temperature. We have introduced the following notational scheme:

≡ ΘX|Y

∂X

(116)
Notice that the stability discriminant is no longer the gradients of L, as in the static
problem of §4.3, but the gradients of Θ = ρL/P . This is a destabilising inﬂuence,
increasing the eﬀect of the cooling as the temperature drops.

∂X

Y

Y

It will be noted that we have chosen to regard the cooling parameter Θ as a function
of P and T . The disturbances of interest are very nearly isobaric so that the relative
change in pressure is much smaller than that of either the density or temperature.
(The quasi-isobaricity stems from δP ∼ 1/kr scaling.) With the δP term dropped, the
entropy equation becomes

Finally, substituting from δρ/ρ from equation (114), we arrive at the governing equation
for δvr:

(cid:20) D
(cid:20) D

Dt

Dt

(cid:18) γ − 1
(cid:18) γ − 1

γ

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

γ

+

+

(cid:21) δρ
(cid:21) 1

ρ

ag

T ΘT|P

T ΘT|P

− δvr
γ

d ln P ρ−γ

dr

(cid:18) aδvr

(cid:19)

β2

D
Dt

= 0

(117)

+

N 2
2g

δvr = 0,

(118)

(119)

where

N 2 ≡ g
γ

∂ ln P ρ−γ

∂r

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics
28
is the Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a (buoyancy) frequency we ﬁrst encountered in §2. Free oscillations in
an adiabatic gas respond at this characteristic frequency and more generally propagate
as internal gravity waves. Note that we have inserted a small parameter “tag”  in order
to set the scale for the ﬁnal term as being large, and thus to formalize a perturbation
treatment. This will allow for a (surprisingly) revealing WKB solution of this diﬀerential
equation.

We seek a solution to equation (118) of the form (e.g., Bender & Orszag 1978):

(cid:19)

(cid:18) aδvr
(cid:18) γ − 1

β2

(cid:19)

y ≡

(cid:20) D

(cid:21)

(cid:20)S0
(cid:21) 1



dt

(125)

(126)

= A exp

+ S1

(120)

where A is a ﬁducial constant whose value is immaterial and the Si are functions of time
to be determined. The diﬀerential equation to be solved is

+

Dt

γ

T ΘT|P

Dy
Dt

+

β2N 2y
2ga

= 0,

(121)

ag

Substituting (120) into (121), and sorting out terms of order 1/2 and 1/ leads to the
two equations:

(S(cid:48)

2S(cid:48)

0)2 + β2N 2 = 0,
− (ag)(cid:48)

1 +

+

S(cid:48)(cid:48)
S(cid:48)

0

0

ag

(cid:18) γ − 1

(cid:19)

γ

T ΘT|P = 0.

(122)

(123)

where we have used the primed (cid:48) notation to represent D/Dt. This pair of ﬁrst order
diﬀerential equations decouples, is solved by elementary methods, and δvr may then be
obtained via (120):

(cid:18) g

(cid:19)1/2

aβN

(cid:90) t(cid:18)

±iβN − γ − 1

2γ

(cid:19)

δvr = β2

exp

T ΘT|P

dt

(124)

4.5. Eliciting the instability

At ﬁrst glance, it might seem that the stability of the Eulerian velocity perturbation is
regulated by the thermodynamic derivative ΘT|P : if this is negative, there is exponential
growth. This is just the classical Field (1965) result. But of course this assessment is too
crude. Despite appearances, the amplitude modulation terms are on the same footing
as the exponential cooling. More surprises.

It is a bit more revealing to work with the Lagrangian displacement ξr, which to

leading WKB order is just δvr/(βN ). This implies

(cid:19)1/2(cid:16) g

(cid:17)1/2

(cid:90) t(cid:18)

exp

aN 2

±iβN − γ − 1

2γ

T ΘT|P

(cid:19)

ξr
β

(cid:18) 1
(cid:19)
(cid:18)aN 2

=

βN

g

Now,

∝ v

d ln P ρ−γ

dr

∝ Θ.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

29

where the last relation follows from the entropy equation. Continuing our equation
juggling,

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:90) dΘ
(cid:90) t

Θ

exp

dt

1
Θ1/2 = exp

−1
2

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)1/2

βN

ξr
β

=

(cid:18)

exp

−1
2

(cid:90) (dΘ/dr)
(cid:20)

Θ/v

(cid:18)
±iβN − γ − 1

2γ

(cid:19)

dt

= exp

(cid:18) γ − 1

(cid:90)

2

(cid:19)

, (127)

(dΘ/dr) dt
d ln P ρ−γ/dr

(cid:21)(cid:19)

T ΘT|P − γ(dΘ/dr)
d ln P ρ−γ/dr

, (128)

where in the ﬁnal equality we have once again used the entropy equation. We have thus
found

Our last trick is to bring a thermodynamic identity into play (Balbus & Soker 1989):

γ

dΘ
dr

= T ΘT|P

d ln P ρ−γ

dr

+ (γ − 1)T ΘT|S

d ln P

dr

,

(129)

which, it will be noted, reduces to the remarkable equation (97) in the limit that Θ = 0.
The Θ terms in our expression for ξ/β collapse, and upon using hydrostatic equilibrium
to substitute for d ln P/dr, we are left with

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)1/2

βN

ξr
β

=

(cid:90) t

(cid:18)
±iβN − (γ − 1)2

2γ

(cid:20)

exp

dt

g
c2
S

T ΘT|S

d ln P ρ−γ/dr

, (130)

(cid:21)(cid:19)

where, as before, c2
S is the square of the isothermal sound speed, P/ρ. Thus, the
behaviour of ξr/β ultimately consists of a buoyant oscillation, modiﬁed by a thermal
loss term whose stability is regulated by an adiabatic thermal gradient. (Knowledgable
readers will recognise the action-conserving amplitude, [βN ]−1/2.) Whether there is
growth or not depends not just on the sign of this gradient, but on how the thermal
behaviour competes with the evolution of β. The classical 1965 Field stability criterion
ΘT|P > 0 is nowhere to be found.

This in itself is surprising and very often misunderstood; perhaps more surprising
still is the sheer complexity of the problem. The reader who has navigated through this
somewhat harrowing section from beginning to end will have developed a healthy respect
for the subtlety of understanding thermal instability in moving backgrounds, with the
full interplay between the dynamics of the background and the developing perturbation.

5. Magnetothermal and heat-ﬂux buoyancy instabilities

5.1. Magnetised heat ﬂux

Consider an ionized plasma whose thermal physics is dominated by heat conduction.
In astrophysical environments this will typically mean a hot diﬀuse plasma such as a
galactic halo or an intracluster medium. The kinetics of such a gas will be dictated
by any magnetic ﬁeld that might be present, even a very weak one. This is because in
what we shall call a “dilute” gas, both the ion and electron gyroradii are much smaller
than the respective particle’s mean free path. Under these circumstances, the standard
form of the collisional heat ﬂux (equation [49]) is no longer valid. Instead, it must be
modiﬁed to take into account (i) that only the component of the gradient parallel to

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

30

the local magnetic ﬁeld lines contributes signiﬁcantly to the ﬂow of heat, and (ii) that
the resultant heat ﬂux ﬂows parallel to the same ﬁeld lines. In other words, we must
replace the scalar thermal conductivity κ with a tensor conductivity κbibj where bi and
bj are components of the unit vector parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld B. (For the scalar
conductivity case, bibj in eﬀect reverts to the Kronecker delta δij.) The magnetic heat
ﬂux then takes the form (Braginskii 1965):

Fi = −κbibj∂jTe

(131)

where ∂j is the partial derivative with respect to the Cartesian variable xj, other xi
held constant. What makes this interesting is that the bi are more than just labels for
a ﬁeld-based coordinate system, they are dynamical variables in their own right.

The change of the form of the conductivity has particularly important consequences
for the stability of hot plasmas. Given a time steady equilibrium, the Eulerian change
in the heat ﬂux δFi in the WKB limit of rapidly spatially varying perturbations is given
by (Balbus 2000, 2001)

δFi = −κ(δbi bj∂jTe + bi δbj∂jTe + bibj∂jδTe)

(132)

The ﬁrst term redirects a pre-exisiting heat ﬂux, the second alters the directional
temperature gradient being tapped as a heat source, and the ﬁnal takes into account the
new temperature gradient along a pre-existing ﬁeld line. The complexity of equation
(132) should be compared with −κ∂iδTe, the sole term that would be present in δFi for
a scalar conductivity.

5.2. Magnetothermal Instability

To see this process in its clearest manifestation, consider a slab of hot gas, hot on the
bottom and cooler on top. The temperature stratiﬁcation is entirely along the z axis.
There is a very weak magnetic ﬁeld present, of no dynamical signﬁcance whatsoever.
The ﬁeld’s kinetic signiﬁcance is that it limits the electron gyroradius to be much less
than a Coulomb mean free path, so that equation (131) describes the conductive heat
ﬂux. In equilibrium, the ﬁeld is taken to be uniform along the x axis, B = Bex, which
ensures that there is no heat ﬂux unless the system is disturbed. The gravitational ﬁeld
points in the −z direction. We assume equal electron and ion temperatures, and that
the speciﬁc entropy S satisﬁes dS/dz > 0, so that in the absence of heat conduction,
any disturbances would correspond to stable buoyant oscillations.

This static equilibrium is disturbed by displacements of the form

ξ = ξ exp(ikx + σt)ez.

Equation (87) is then trivially satisﬁed, equation (88) does not apply because the
presence of heat ﬂow renders the dynamics nonadiabatic, and equation (89) has only
one component:

δBz = ikBξ.

(133)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

31

Figure 3. Numerical MHD simulation of the magnetothermal instability (McCourt et
al. 2011). Field lines are shown in black, and colour indicates temperature (with red
hotter, blue colder). Small perturbations in the initial horizontal ﬁeld are convectively
unstable. This instability eventually leads to the complete disruption of the initial
conﬁguration and the onset of sustained non-linear turbulence.

The change in the unit magnetic ﬁeld vector b is simply

implying a perturbed heat ﬂux of

δbz =

δBz
B

δFx = −κ

= ikξ,

(cid:20)δBz

B

(cid:21)

= −ikκ [ξ∂zT + δT ] ≡ −ikκ∆T

(134)

(135)

∂zT + ikδT

The heat ﬂux is proportional to the Lagrangian change in the temperature ∆T . This
should be contrasted with the zero ﬁeld result, δFx = −ikκδT , where only the Eulerian
change is important. The diﬀerence is profound: Eulerian and Lagrangian temperature
changes may well have opposite signs.

The perturbed dynamical equation of motion in the x direction reduces to ik δP =
0, so that the pressure perturbation is identically zero, implying δ ln ρ = −δ ln T . In the
z direction, with δv ≡ σξ,
dP
dz

(136)
where −ρg = dP/dz deﬁnes the gravitational ﬁeld strength g. Finally, the perturbed
entropy equation reads

= −δρ
ρ

σ2ξ =

δρ
ρ2

g

(cid:21)

(137)

ξ.

(138)

− σγ

δρ
ρ

+ σξ

d ln P ρ−γ

dz

(cid:20)

Replacing δ ln ρ with −δ ln T and combining (135) and (137) we obtain

k2κT (γ − 1)

σγ +

P

ρ

d ln P ρ−γ

k2κT (γ − 1)

+

dz

P

d ln T

dz

∇·δF .

= −γ − 1
(cid:20)
(cid:21) δρ

P

=

σ

t=0t=4tbuoyt=6tbuoyt=10tbuoyt=30tbuoySurprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

Finally, substituting for δρ from equation (136), the dispersion relation emerges:

σ3 + σ2 γ − 1

γ

k2κT

P

+ σN 2 +

γ − 1
γ

k2κT

P

g

d ln T

dz

= 0,

32

(139)

where we have used a standard notation for the Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a oscillation frequency,

N 2 ≡=

g
γ

d ln P ρ−γ

dz

,

(140)

which is a positive quantity for stable adiabatic perturbations. Equation (139) may be
compared with the dispersion relation for nonmagnetised thermal conduction

σ2 + σ

γ − 1
γ

k2κT

P

+ N 2 = 0;

(141)

here the thermal term serves only to damp the adiabatic Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a oscillations.
On the other hand, when even a tiny magnetic ﬁeld is included, one branch of long
wavelength disturbances are characterised by a balance between the third and fourth
terms in equation (139) and the growth/damping rate is

σ = −(γ − 1)

k2κT

P

d ln T /dz

d ln P ρ−γ/dz

(long wavelengths),

(142)

the other two solutions correspond to buoyant oscillations, a dominant balance between
the ﬁrst and third terms. For short wavelengths, the interesting solution is a dominant
balance between the second and fourth terms:

σ2 = −g

d ln T

dz

(short wavelengths).

(143)

Evidently, if dT /dz < 0, the equilibrium is unstable. This is quite surprising:
in
the presence of dissipative thermal conduction, short wavelength disturbances might
normally be thought to be prone to strong damping, not a robust instability growing
on a free-fall time! Figure (3) shows a simulation of the full nonlinear development of
the MTI.

Perhaps the greatest surprise here is that the magnetised dispersion relation makes
no reference at all to a magnetic ﬁeld, yet produces results that are completely diﬀerent
from a nonmagnetised gas. The key point is that the magnetic ﬁeld aﬀects the dynamics
when the Lorentz force becomes comparable to either the pressure or rotational forces.
On the other hand, the magnetic ﬁeld aﬀects the kinetics when the electron or ion
gyroradius (depending upon whether thermal conduction or viscosity is involved) is
small compared with a Coulomb mean free path, a very diﬀerent requirement. For
the dilute astrophysical plasma in which Coulomb thermal conduction is important, an
astonishingly minute magnetic ﬁeld will suﬃce—10−21 T is enough to make an electron
gyroradius smaller than the Coulomb mean free path for a 106K plasma with an electron
density of 104m−3. Interstellar magnetic ﬁelds are more than ten orders of magnitude in
excess of this. The eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld is masked in our use of equation (131) for
the heat ﬂux, serving only to set the cross-ﬁeld diﬀusion equal to zero. For a suﬃciently
weak magnetic ﬁeld cross-ﬁeld diﬀusion would have to be included, in which case the
transition from magnetic to nonmagnetic plasma would be quite smooth. Even when

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

33

our interest is purely at the level of dynamics, it is often not a straightforward matter to
decide when a seemingly weak magnetic ﬁeld might be important. The question always
is,”weak” compared to what? We will have surprises in store for us along these lines in
sections (7) and (8).

To summarise: the most rapidly growing modes are at short wavelengths, with
buoyantly unstable behaviour reminiscent of violating the Schwarzschild criterion for
the onset of convection—except that it is not the entropy gradient that enters, it is the
temperature gradient.

5.3. Physics of the magnetothermal instability

Recall the reason for classical convective instability in a gas: an adiabatically displaced
ﬂuid element will cool at constant entropy on an upward displacement, in pressure
balance at all times with its surroundings.
If this constant entropy element is
nevertheless still warmer than the equilibrium background at the displaced location then
(i) the background entropy must have been decreasing upward, and (ii) the element
will continue to rise by buoyant forces. Thus, the criterion for instability is that
the equilibrium entropy proﬁle must be decreasing upwards. The presence of thermal
conduction would only lessen the growth rate, by lessening the temperature diﬀerence
(and thus the density diﬀerence) between the element and its immediate surroundings.
When a weak magnetic ﬁeld alters the thermal conduction, heat ﬂows most
eﬃciently along the ﬁeld line, and at large wavenumbers the ﬂux is so eﬃcient that
nearly isothermal conditions are maintained along a ﬁeld line (i.e. ∆T (cid:39) 0) and it is
the component of ∇T across the ﬁeld line and parallel to gravity that is important.
Therefore, if the background temperature decreases with height, an upwardly displaced
element is always warm relative to the surroundings, and vice-versa for a downwardly
displaced element. This must be convectively unstable. At small wavenumbers (long
wavelengths), the growth rate is small. To ﬁrst order in σ, equation (136) suggests
ignoring changes in δρ, hence also in δT since δP = 0. The instability is only in the
perturbed velocity.
Indeed, at ﬁrst sight it appears not to be a buoyant instability
at all: the growth rate (142) is independent of the gravitational ﬁeld. The dominant
balance is thermal, between the heat deposition along the perturbed ﬁeld line and the
corresponding rise in entropy of an upwardly moving ﬂuid element. But the role of
gravity is hidden: in this regime, g is in eﬀect a large parameter. Indeed, taking g → ∞
in equation [139] produces the same growth rate. This ensures that an element moves
“instantly” to the proper δρ = 0 position as the gas is heated by conduction along the
displaced ﬁeld line. Equation (136) shows that the precise δρ is small but negative, i.e.
the element really is driven by buoyant forces.

The ﬁnal surprise is the astrophysical signiﬁcance of the instability: a weak to
moderate magnetic ﬁeld cannot thermally isolate a hot dilute plasma in a gravitational
ﬁeld. In fact, such conﬁgurations appear to be candidates for a dynamo ampliﬁcation
of the magnetic ﬁeld (Parrish & Stone 2007, McCourt et al. 2011).

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

34

A problem of widespread interest is one in which cool gas is stratiﬁed at the bottom
of a gravitational potential well surrounded by hotter exterior plasma. This is the
disposition of the intracluster medium in rich clusters of galaxies. The question is
whether thermal conduction from the hot gas will evaporate the cool gas or whether
the cool gas reservoir will grow by radiative losses. It came as a great surprise when it
emerged that the act of heating cool gas from above by thermal conduction is actually
unstable. When a weak magnetic ﬁeld is present, that is.

5.4. A buoyant heat ﬂux instability

Remarkably, as ﬁrst shown by Quataert (2008), the magnetothermal instability is only
half the story. Let us reconsider the eﬀects of a heat ﬂux in the background equilibrium.
As before, gravity points in the downward z direction. The simplest manifestation of the
heat ﬂux instability involves a purely vertical magnetic ﬁeld, parallel to the gravitational
ﬁeld. We must also allow for both vertical and horizontal displacements (ξx, ξy), and the
same for the wavenumber components (kx, kz). As before, the disturbances have the
leading order WKB form exp(σt − ik · r); the background ﬁeld is presumed nearly
constant on the scale of the perturbation. Mass conservation (87) then implies

kxξx + kzξz = 0.

(144)

There is now an equilibrium heat ﬂux present, assumed to be divergence free:

F = −κbbz

∂T
∂z

= −ezκ

∂T
∂z

.

The perturbed heat ﬂux is given once again by equation (132):

δFi = −κ(δbi bj∂jTe + bi δbj∂jTe + bibj∂jδTe),

(145)

(146)

but now the ﬁrst term in this expression, which was not present in our earlier
magnetothermal calculation, serves to redirect the equilibrium ﬂux. The perturbed
magnetic ﬁeld unit vector,

δb = δ

= b×

×b

,

(cid:18) B

(cid:19)

B

(cid:19)

(cid:18)δB

B

must always be orthogonal to the unperturbed b, and has only an x component:

δbx = i(k · b)ξx,

where (89) has been used.

The equations of motion are

σ2ξx = −ikx

σ2ξz = −δρ
ρ

δP
ρ
g − ikz

δP
ρ

and with k · ξ = 0, we may eliminate δP from the above to ﬁnd

δρ
ρ

= −σ2
g

k2
k2
x

ξz

(147)

(148)

(149)

(150)

(151)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

where k2 = k2

z. The perturbed heat ﬂux is

(cid:18)

x + k2
δF = −κ

δbx

(cid:18)

and

∇·δF = −κ

ex + i(k · b)δT ez

∂T
∂z

ikxδbx

∂T
∂z

− (k · b)2δT

(cid:19)

(cid:18)σ2

g

∇·δF = κT k2
zξz

− ∂z ln T

k2
k2
x

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

35

(152)

(153)

= −k2

zκ(ξz∂zT − δT )

(154)

With the zero pressure condition δ ln T = −δ ln ρ and equation (151), this becomes

Even before we arrive at a dispersion relation, it is clear that eﬃcient heat transport
will lead to a buoyant instability in this problem. As kz → ∞, there must be a near
cancellation of the two terms in the ﬂux divergence of the right side of equation (154).
The ﬁrst is the ordinary thermal diﬀusion term arising from temperature ﬂuctuations,
the second represents heat ﬂow along redirected ﬁeld lines. We will presently see that the
precise growth rate is slightly less than that given by a balance by the terms on the right,
so ξz > 0 corresponds to ∇·δF < 0. In other words, the redirected ﬁeld lines converge
when ξz > 0, and diverge when ξz < 0. This is a prescription for buoyant instability,
since there is conductive heating (cooling) for an upward (downward) displacement. The
dispersion relation becomes:

γ − 1
γ

κT
P

∂z ln P ρ−γσ − γ − 1

σ3 +

k2
x
k2

g
γ

k2
zσ2 +

k2
zk2
x
k2 ∂z ln T = 0 (155)
Just as suggested by equation (154), there is now instability if ∂T /∂z > 0, exactly the
opposite of the magnetothermal instability conﬁguration of the previous section.
In
other words, even if the cold gas is on the bottom, the conﬁguration is unstable! Now
that really is a surprise.

κT
P

γ

g

The problem is not so much the cold gas on the bottom, it is the heat ﬂux ﬂowing
into this gas, trying to disrupt this happy conﬁguration, that is the root of the diﬃculties.
This heat-ﬂux buoyancy instability, or HBI as it is known, achieves its most important
astrophysical application in X-ray clusters of galaxies. The space between the galaxies
in such a cluster is ﬁlled with a hot, diﬀuse plasma, cooler toward the central region at
the base of the cluster well. We have just seen that any ﬂux into this cool region will
be unstable, a fact not known until Quataert’s important 2008 paper. The nature of
the response of the gas to the HBI is to try to draw out a tangential ﬁeld, thermally
shielding the interior (see the simulation of ﬁgure 4), but in real clusters conditions may
be too disturbed.

As an epilogue to this story, there is a Braginskii viscosity as well as a Braginskii
conductivity (Braginskii 1965, Islam & Balbus 2005), which channels the momentum ﬂux
in an ionised plasma along ﬁeld lines in a manner similar to the heat ﬂux. A recent study
(Latter & Kunz 2012) points to the importance of Braginskii viscosity in limiting the
thermal insulation properties of the HBI in the nonlinear regime. (The magnetothermal
instability is much less aﬀected.) The most basic properties of the thermal behaviour of

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

36

Figure 4. A numerical MHD simulation by McCourt et al. 2011 of the heating
buoyancy instability. Colour indicates temperature (with red hotter, blue colder) and
the magnetic ﬁeld lines are drawn in black. Small perturbations to the initial vertical
ﬁeld are unstable due to eﬀective conductive heating (cooling) along the magnetic
ﬁeld lines associated with upward (downward) displacements. This induces convective
instability. The instability eventually saturates, rearranging the ﬁeld lines into a stable
horizontal conﬁguration. The horizontal ﬁeld contains components of both senses to
conserve ﬂux.

the gas in X-ray clusters is still not at all well-understood. How the various Braginskii
diﬀusion coeﬃcients and their associated instabilities play themselves out promises to
be full of surprises, ripe for future elucidation.

6. The Newcomb-Parker Problem

6.1. Introduction

Often just called the “Parker Instability” in the astrophysical literature, the Newcomb-
Parker problem addresses the behaviour of a gas in a gravitational ﬁeld with substantial
magnetic support. Before the astrophysicists took it up (Parker 1966), the problem
had been thoroughly studied in the 1950s and early 1960s by the magnetic conﬁnement
community of plasma physicists. This is perhaps not too surprising: if one’s goal is to
conﬁne a thermonuclear plasma in the laboratory, it behooves one to understand any
instabilities that might be present.

The astrophysical side of the Parker Instability arose from attempts to understand
hydrostatic equilibrium in a vertical gravitational ﬁeld, in practice the disc of the Milky
Way Galaxy. (More recent applications include accretion disc theory.) In the Galactic
problem, in addition to the presence of signiﬁcantly magnetised interstellar gas, cosmic
rays are also thought to comprise an important dynamic component. In some discussions
of this problem, the cosmic rays are central to an explanation of the instability itself,
with these energetic particles moving upwards along magnetic ﬁeld lines anchored in
place by sinking cool interstellar gas. In the 1970s, the Parker Instability was studied
as a means for initiating star formation (Mouschovias 1974, Blitz & Shu 1980).

Discussion of the Parker Instability in the astrophysical literature often tends to be
somewhat confusing; Parker’s 1966 paper is itself far from an easy read. The surprise
here is that the essence of the instability is really simplicity itself. The inclusion of cosmic
rays is somewhat of a red herring: this is just Schwarzschild convection in a more general

t=0t=3tbuoyt=12tbuoyt=17tbuoyt=50tbuoyTemperature1.01.05Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

37

guise. Make an upward displacement. Is δρ < 0? If so, the system is unstable. In the
plasma literature this point is understood, but the variational techniques used are a bit
too powerful, hiding some of the interesting dynamics. Here, we are motivated to set up
an “asymptotic matching zone” that both plasma- and astrophysicists may appreciate.

6.2. Equilibrium state

Consider a slab of interstellar gas lying in the xy plane with vertical coordinate z. The
gravitational ﬁeld g = −gez points downward in the −z direction. In equilibrium, the
gas contains a magnetic ﬁeld pointing in the horizontal ex direction, depending only
upon z:

B = B(z)ex

(156)

The gas also contains cosmic rays, with pressure Pcr(z). The cosmic ray pressure is
taken to remain constant along ﬁeld lines; i.e., any gradient is immediately eliminated
by rapid particle streaming:
B·∇Pcr = 0

(157)

This is our eﬀective equation of state for the cosmic rays. The equation for hydrostatic
equilibrium is

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

d
dz

P + Pcr +

B2
2µ0

= −ρg

(158)

The ﬁeld g may be any suitable function of z.

6.3. Departures from equilibrium

Next, consider displacement perturbations in the vertical direction, ξ = ξez, the most
unstable modes. We are free to assume an x dependence of exp(ikx) since there is no x
dependence in the equilibrium state. The z dependence is left unspeciﬁed. We will work
at the point of marginal stability, which will allow an exact treatment of the problem.
Accordingly, there is no time dependence in either the equilibrium or perturbed states.

The linearly perturbed equation of motion (here, hydrostatic balance) is:

0 = − 1
ρ

∇

δP + δPcr +

B · δB

µ0

+

δρ
ρ

g +

B∂xδB

ρµ0

+ ex

δB·∇B

ρµ0

. (159)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(The subscripted notation ∂i denotes partial diﬀerentiation with respect to coordinate
i.) The induction equation for the magnetic ﬁeld is

δB = ∇×(ξ×B) = ∇×(ξBey),

or

δBz = B∂xξ,

δBx = −ξ∂zB

(160)

(161)

Notice that we retain background gradient terms that would be dropped in a WKB
treatment. Using the above relations,

δBz ∂zB = (B∂xξ)∂zB = B∂x(ξ∂zB) = −B∂xδBx

(162)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

38

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

B · δB

µ0

so that the ﬁnal two terms in the x equation of motion exactly cancel. This leaves

0 = − 1
ρ

∂x

δP + δPcr +

≡ − 1
ρ

∂x(δPtot)

(163)

Since the operator ∂x amounts to multiplication by ik, the total perturbed pressure δPtot
vanishes for these most unstable modes. The z force balance is then very simple:

0 =

δρ
ρ

g + (kvA)2ξ

where the Alfv´en velocity is given by

vA =

B

(ρµ0)1/2 ,

with µ0 being the vacuum permeability.

(164)

(165)

6.4. Stability Criterion
The most unstable modes are clearly those with k → 0, so the marginal stability
condition is just neutral buoyancy:

δρ
ρ

= 0.

(166)

No magnetic ﬁeld in sight. Neither Karl Schwarzschild nor Baron Rayleigh would have
been surprised at this simple and intuitive result. Astrophysical complexity should not
be allowed to obscure this basic physical point.

6.4.1. Adiabatic disturbances For adiabatic conditions, equation (88) gives

(cid:18) δP

P

δρ
ρ

=

1
γ

∂ ln P ρ−γ

∂z

+ ξ

(cid:19)

(167)

(168)

Since

(169)

In the problem without the magnetic ﬁeld or cosmic rays, the δP term vanishes, and we
recover the classical Schwarzschild criterion that the entropy should increase upward:

∂ ln P ρ−γ

∂z

> 0 (Schwarzschild Stability Criterion),

for stability.
∂P/∂z = −ρg, this may also be written

(The sign is determined by requiring δρ > 0 for ξ > 0).

∂ ln ρ

∂z

+

g
a2 < 0 (Stability),

where a2 = γP/ρ is the adiabatic sound speed.
completely general, even with cosmic rays and magnetic ﬁelds, for an adiabatic gas.

In this form, the result is in fact

To see this, note the following cosmic ray manipulations:

0 = δ(B · ∇Pcr) = δB·∇Pcr + B·∇δPcr
= δBz∂zPcr + ikB δPcr
= (Bx∂xξ) ∂zPcr + ikB δPcr
= ikB(δPcr + ξ · ∇Pcr) = ikB ∆Pcr

(170)

(171)

(172)

(173)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

39

In other words, the Lagrangian pressure disturbance of the cosmic rays vanishes,
δPcr = −ξ∂zPcr.

Similarly, for the magnetic pressure,

µ0δPmag = B · δB = B δBx = B(−ξ∂zB) = −ξ∂z(B2/2)

and since

we ﬁnd that

0 = δPtot = δP + δPcr + δPmag,

(cid:19)

.

δP = ξ

∂
∂z

Pcr +

B2
2µ0

(174)

(175)

(176)

(cid:18)

(cid:20) g

Inserting this result into (167), using equation (158), and demanding δρ > 0 for stability,
leads us directly to the condition (169) once again.

The destabilising role of the cosmic rays and magnetic ﬁeld becomes more apparent
if the stability diagnostic is the vertical temperature gradient. Then, combining
equations (169) and (158) yields the stability criterion

∂ ln a2

∂z

> −

a2 +

1
P

∂
∂z

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18) B2

2µ0

+ Pcr

(Stability)

(177)

In other words, a less negatively steep temperature gradient will destabilise.

There are three surprises here. The ﬁrst is that once the gravitational ﬁeld is
speciﬁed, the presence of magnetic ﬁelds and cosmic rays makes no diﬀerence to the
upper limit of the inverse density scale height for buoyant stability.
It is always
g/a2.
(The critical temperature scale is, however, aﬀected.) The second surprise is
that the derivation has been simple and general, at both the conceptual and technical
levels. We are dealing with elementary buoyancy forces and nothing more. Students
of astrophysical gasdynamics would do well to examine the more extravagent claims on
behalf of the Parker Instability with a discerning eye.

The third surprise is that the criterion is entirely incorrect for a dilute plasma.

6.4.2. Parker–Newcomb–Magnetothermal Instability To include the eﬀects of thermal
conduction along the ﬁeld lines, for the calculation of δρ/ρ from the entropy equation
we return to equation (138). This goes through just as before, only now we must retain
the δP/P term because of cosmic ray pressure and a dynamically important magnetic
ﬁeld:

k2κT (γ − 1)

σγ +

P

d ln P ρ−γ

k2κT (γ − 1)

=

σ

+

Equation (176) is unchanged by the inclusion of thermal conduction, so (178) becomes

k2κT (γ − 1)

σγ +

P

ρ

−σγ

=

a2 +

d ln ρ

dz

k2κT (γ − 1)

P

d ln T

dz

ξ(179)

dz

(cid:18) g

P

(cid:19)

+

(cid:21)

d ln T

dz

ξ+σ

(178)

δP
P

(cid:21)

(cid:21) δρ
(cid:21) δρ

ρ

(cid:20)
(cid:20)

(cid:20)
(cid:20)

In the absence of thermal conduction (κ = 0), we recover the classic result of the
previous section. But when thermal conduction is present, the σ → 0 limit is a bit more

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

40

delicate. In the limit of small temperature gradients, the two terms in square brackets
on the right side of the equation form the dominant balance. Thus, we obtain not only
a stability criterion, but a leading order growth rate! When we are stable by the classic
Newcomb-Parker criterion, there is instability when the temperature gradient decreases
upwards. This is precisely the magnetothermal instability criterion (and leading order
growth rate), recovered just as the classic Schwarzschild criterion is recovered in the
conduction free case: without reference to the magnetic ﬁeld at all.

The classic Newcomb-Parker stability criterion is simply not applicable to dilute

astrophysical plasmas. Surprise.

7. Local, 3D, weakly-magnetized, adiabatic perturbations in 2D rotating,
stratiﬁed backgrounds

We begin rather formally, deriving and examining a kind of master equation for
the evolution of three-dimensional Lagrangian displacements in axisymmetric, two-
dimensional, magnetized, shearing, stratiﬁed backgrounds. The magnetic ﬁeld is
considered to be weak in that it does not aﬀect the equilibrium state, only the
perturbations. We are then in the regime of weak ﬁelds and large wavenumbers.

This is a very general equation. Moreover, it has a sort of elegant transparancy:
the emergent force balance is pleasingly intuitive. We will use various limits of the
equation to (i) derive directly a very general form of the magnetorotational instability
(normally a tedious aﬀair); and (ii) derive some new results on linear convection theory
in a background shear similar to that of the Sun.

The surprises here are many, and they will be highlighted in the development to
come. One of the most important will be obvious in the early stages of the development,
and that is the deceptive ease with which magnetism can be included in the analysis, yet
its eﬀects are often profound. We have already seen evidence of this in our discussions
of various thermal conduction driven instabilities due to kinetic heat ﬂow along ﬁeld
lines—a tiny ﬁeld goes a long way. That was all kinetic transport. We will see here
that the direct dynamical inﬂuence of a supposedly weak magnetic ﬁeld can be no less
subtle.

7.1. Governing equation

7.1.1. Equilbrium. Our background equilibrium state might be a star, disc, or model
galaxy. The gas is axisymmetric about a rotation axis, denoted by z.
It will be
convenient to use either spherical (r, θ, φ) or cylindrical (R, φ, z) coordinates depending
upon the problem at hand. The density ρ, pressure P , and angular velocity Ω are then
regarded as functions either of r and θ, or R and z. The same holds for any other
variables constructed from these quantities. As usual, the velocity vector is denoted by
v.

The partial derivatives of entropy and angular momentum cannot be chosen entirely

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

41

arbitrarily, even if our interest is a simple local calculation in which these quantities are
viewed as given background-deﬁned constants. Rather, because the magnetic ﬁeld is
negligible in the equilibrium state, the derivatives are linked by the φ component of the
vorticity equation (27), which reads:

R

∂Ω2
∂z

=

1
ρ2

∂P
∂z

− ∂ρ
∂z

∂P
∂R

.

(180)

For future reference, it is also convenient to have an alternative form of this equation
in terms of the entropy-like variable σ = ln P ρ−γ rather than the density ρ,

R

∂Ω2
∂z

=

1
γρ

∂P
∂R

− ∂σ
∂R

∂P
∂z

.

(181)

Inertial

terms from Lagrangian derivatives. We are interested in linear
7.1.2.
departures from the fundamental equation given by (11). We shall work in the local
WKB limit, so that for the weak magnetic ﬁeld B only terms involving the gradients of
δB are retained, as these are boosted by the assumed large wavenumber. If we divide
equation (11) by ρ and take Eulerian perturbations, there results

(cid:18) ∂ρ
(cid:18) ∂σ

∂R

∂z

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

where now

δv + (δv·∇)v =

D
Dt

D
Dt

=

∂
∂t

+ Ω

∂
∂φ

.

δρ

ρ2 ∇P − 1

ρ

∇

(cid:18)

δP +

B · δB

µ0

(cid:19)

+

1
ρµ0

(B·∇)δB(182)

(183)

It is easiest to begin with a representation in cylindrical coordinates. The projected

components of the left-side operator of equation (182) are:

Dt

(cid:20) D
(cid:20) D
(cid:20) D

Dt

Dt

eR·

eφ·

ez·

(cid:21)
(cid:21)
(cid:21)

δv + (δv·∇)v

δv + (δv·∇)v

δv + (δv·∇)v

=

DδvR
Dt

− 2Ωδvφ

+ 2ΩδvR + R(δv · ∇)Ω

=

Dδvφ
Dt

=

Dδvz
Dt

.

(184)

(185)

(186)

Let ξ be the Lagrangian displacement ﬁeld. From (78),

≡ ∆v = δv + ξ · ∇(RΩeφ) = δv + eφξ · ∇(RΩ) − eRξφΩ,

(187)

Dξ
Dt

whence

Dξφ
Dt
Using (188) in (184)-(186), we arrive at

DξR
Dt

δvR =

δvφ =

,

− Rξ · ∇Ω,

δvz =

Dξz
Dt

.

δv + (δv·∇)v = ¨ξ + 2Ω × ˙ξ + eR(Rξ · ∇)Ω2

D
Dt

(188)

(189)

where Ω = Ωez. The overhead “dot” notation indicates a time derivative of the vector
components but not the unit vectors. In other words, the coordinates are now treated

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

42

as locally Cartesian, with ex replacing eR, ey replacing eφ, and ez remaining as such.
The physical meaning of the additional two inertial forces on the right side of (189) is
readily grasped: the ﬁrst is obviously the Coriolis force, and the second is diﬀerence
between centrifugal and rotational forces, a tidal force that is in balance only at ξ = 0.
Since the time derivatives are taken following ﬂuid elements, the appropriate ﬁxed
spatial coodinates when a time derivative is taken are those following the unperturbed
ﬂuid elements. Denoting these coordinates by primed notation R(cid:48), φ(cid:48), and z(cid:48), we have

R(cid:48) = R, φ(cid:48) = φ − tΩ(R, z),

z(cid:48) = z

The usual chain rule then gives
∂Ω
∂R

∂R(cid:48) − t

∂
∂R

=

∂

and more generally

∇ = ∇(cid:48) − t(∇Ω)

∂
∂φ(cid:48)

∂
∂φ(cid:48)

(190)

(191)

(192)

R + z(cid:48)k(cid:48)

In the WKB limit, the embedded perturbations of interest will take the plane wave
form exp i(R(cid:48)k(cid:48)
z + mφ(cid:48)). (As m is the same in both frames, there is no primed
superscript.) Equation (192) then implies
∇ = ik(cid:48) − imt(∇Ω) ≡ ik(t),

(193)

when operating upon perturbed δ-variables. The poloidal components of k thus tend
to align with −∇ as time goes on. A particularly useful result follows with some help
from equation [33]:

k(t)·B(t) = k(cid:48)·B(0).

(194)

That is, even though the (Eulerian) wavenumber k and toroidal ﬁeld component Bφ are
both time dependent, the dot product k·B is a local constant.

7.1.3. External forces. There remains the right side of (182). The constraint equations
(87) and (88) now yield

(195)

(196)

(197)

∇P
γρ

δρ

ρ2 ∇P =

ξ · ∇ ln P ρ−γ
(B · ∇)δB = −(k · B)2

where as earlier we use the Alfv´en velocity,

vA =

B√
ρµ0

.

1
ρµ0

ξ ≡ −(k · vA)2ξ

ρµ0

Equation (196) implies a very simple “Hooke’s Law” behaviour for magnetic tension:
the force is restorative and proportional to the displacement. Surprisingly, “restorative”
forces in rotating systems can have precisely the opposite eﬀect, as we shall soon see.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

43

Putting together equations (182), (189), (192), (195), (196) yields the set of

equations

¨ξ + (k · vA)2ξ + 2Ω × ˙ξ + eR(Rξ · ∇)Ω2 − ∇P

γρ

ξ · ∇ ln P ρ−γ

B · δB

µ0

δPtot = δP +
k(t)·ξ = 0,
k(t) = k(cid:48) − mt(∇Ω)

+

ik(t) δPtot

ρ

= 0

(198)

(199)

(200)

(201)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

It is useful to eliminate the ﬁnal total pressure term δPtot, a process eﬀected by taking
the dot product of (198) with k to isolate the ﬁnal term of equation (198). Then,
equation (198) is replaced with

I − kk
k2

·L(ξ) = 0

(202)
where I is the identity matrix with entries δij (Kronecker delta), and L(ξ) is the linear
operator

L(ξ) = ¨ξ+(k · vA)2ξ+2Ω × ˙ξ+eR(Rξ · ∇)Ω2−∇P

ξ · ∇ ln P ρ−γ(203)
Each of the individual terms in L(ξ) is readily identiﬁable. From left to right we have
acceleration, magnetic tension, Coriolis, tides, and ﬁnally buoyancy. Note as well the
similar ξ · ∇ couplings that the tidal and buoyant forces both invoke. We shall argue
in §9 below that this entropy-angular momentum dynamical pairing is important to an
understanding of the Sun’s rotation pattern.

The lead factor in (202) is a projection operator, ensuring that only L(ξ) forces
perpendicular to the wavevector k enter into dynamical consideration. Finally, given
the generality of our assumptions, the magnetic force is surprisingly simple, appearing
only as the spring-like term (k · vA)2ξ.

γρ

7.2. The magnetorotational instability

7.2.1. Reduced system. To begin our exploration of the remarkable equation (202),
consider ﬁrst a disc in which the local equilibrium pressure gradient is negligible. (Such
conditions typically prevail in the midplane of a rotationally supported disc.)

For axisymmetric (m = 0) disturbances, the wavenumber is independent of time,
and we will begin here. With disturbances proportional to exp(ikzz), only displacements
in the plane of the disc enter, and the reduced equations are:

¨ξR − 2Ω ˙ξφ +
¨ξφ + 2Ω ˙ξR + (k · vA)2ξφ = 0.

∂ ln R

+ (k · vA)2

ξR = 0,

(204)

(205)

(cid:18) ∂Ω2

(cid:19)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

44

7.2.2. Hydrodynamic limit When the magnetic ﬁeld vanishes, the two equations are
yet more simple,

¨ξR − 2Ωξφ +

∂Ω2
∂ ln R

ξR = 0,

(206)

¨ξφ + 2ΩξR = 0.

(207)
The local normal modes with time dependence exp(−iωt) satisfy the dispersion relation

ω2 = 4Ω2 +

∂Ω2
∂ ln R

=

1
R3

∂(R4Ω2)

∂R

≡ κ2,

(208)

a quantity known as the epicyclic frequency. Displaced ﬂuid elements, viewed from
the point-of-view of an observer at the undisturbed circular orbit location, execute
a retrograde ellipse.
It is retrograde in the sense that the element moves round the
ellipse clockwise (counterclockwise) when the main circular orbit is counterclockwise
(clockwise). The center of the ellipse is the undisturbed location of the element’s circular
orbit.

This is a simple consequence of angular momentum conservation. The element is
moving on the ellipse—the “epicycle”—around the central point while maintaining the
angular momentum of the undisturbed circular orbit. Thus, when the element is on its
outward excursion at a greater radial distance, it must rotate a little more slowly. It
lags behind relative to a point on the undisturbed circular orbit. When the element is
on its inward excursion, it must rotate a little more rapidly. This results in retrograde
circulation. In astrophysical discs, generally κ < 2Ω. From equation (207), the epicycle
is elongated along the circular orbit, with major-to-minor axis ratio of 2Ω/κ.

Equation (208) indicates that if the speciﬁc angular momentum R2Ω increases
outward, then κ2 > 0 and our description of elliptical epicycles is entirely self-consistent.
But if the speciﬁc angular momentum decreases with increasing R, κ2 < 0 and the
displacements do not form a bounded ellipse, but instead grow exponentially. In this
case, the ﬂow is unstable to inﬁnitesimal axisymmetric disturbances. The constraint
that the speciﬁc angular momentum increase outward for stable ﬂow is known as the
Rayleigh criterion, after its discoverer Lord Rayleigh (1916). The Rayleigh criterion
is satisﬁed for Keplerian ﬂow (R2Ω ∝ R1/2), galactic ﬂat rotation curves (∝ R), and
essentially all other astrophysical environments.

The Rayleigh criterion clearly is not a guarantee of stability to nonaxisymmetric
disturbances. A sharp outwardly increasing discontinuity in Ω in a disc would be liable
to Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities; less dramatically, a simple inﬂection point in the ﬂow
(where d2Ω/dR2 = 0) may be enough for destabilization (Acheson 1990). But these are
nonlocal ﬂows in the sense that the rotational proﬁle exhibits a marked deviation from
simple shear on a length scale is that is comparable to or smaller than the scale of the
perturbation. The Rayleigh criterion is a local criterion, and as such is relevant to the
important question of whether turbulence could develop locally in astrophysical discs,
using the free energy of the shear itself. Plane parallel shear ﬂow certainly does break
down into turbulence at high Reynolds numbers, and this has undoubtedly encouraged

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

45

the belief that discs will behave in a similar manner. The problem is that, unlike
plane-parallel ﬂow, discs are characterised by a strongly stabilising, outwardly increasing
angular momentum gradient. The question is whether this gradient is enough to prevent
nonlinear stability from occurring.

The onset of turbulence is a deeply contentious subject, one that is diﬃcult to
study analytically, numerically, or in the laboratory. Laboratory experiments designed
to measure the rotation velocity ﬁeld by Doppler techniques ﬁnd no nonlinear shear
instabilities in Keplerian-like ﬂows (Ji et al. 2006, Schartman et al. 2012). This is in
accord with the ﬁndings of early numerical work (Balbus, Hawley, & Stone 1996) and
a very detailed follow-up (Lesur & Longaretti 2005). A recent claim for turbulence and
enhanced angular momentum transport in Keplerian shear ﬂow (Paoletti & Lathrop
2011) is now understood to be a boundary layer eﬀect stemming from presence of
the axial endcaps (Avila 2012, Nordsiek et al. 2015).
It was precisely to mitigate
these eﬀects that the Princeton experiment, described in Schartman et al. 2012, split
the endcaps of their Couette apparatus into diﬀerentially rotating rings. Even with
such precautions, end eﬀects can still induce turbulent ﬂow. When viscous eﬀects are
suﬃciently small, however, the turbulence is spatially conﬁned, and as of this writing
experiments and simulations seem to be in good accord (Avila, private communication).
Whatever turbulence is present in laboratory Couette ﬂow is due to viscous boundary
layers, not local shear ﬂow.

Magnetic ﬁelds. The inclusion of

7.2.3.
the apparently restorative magnetic
acceleration term (k · vA)2ξ in equations (equations [204]-[205]) produces a surprisingly
If we seek solutions of the form exp(ikz − iωt), the
expanded dispersion relation.
resulting equation is

ω4 − ω2[κ2 + 2(k · vA)2] + (k · vA)2

(k · vA)2 +

∂Ω2
∂ ln R

= 0.

(209)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

This is a quadratic equation in ω2, and it is easily seen that if the ﬁnal constant term
is negative, solutions exist with ω2 < 0, i.e.
local instabilities. But it is easy for this
constant term to be negative because ∂Ω2/∂R < 0 quite generally in astrophysical
discs. Thus, provided the magnetic ﬁeld is not too strong, k · vA can always be
chosen suﬃciently small at long wavelengths so that instability is present. This is
the magnetorotational instability, or MRI, and it is thought to be the underlying cause
of turbulence in even moderately ionised astrophysical discs (Balbus & Hawley 1991,
1998). Figure (5) shows an early two-dimensional nonlinear simulation of the MRI,
starting with a tube of magnetic ﬂux.

The MRI is endlessly surprising. The reader may enjoy the algebraic exercise of

showing that the maximum growth rate of the MRI is

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) dΩ

d ln R

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

|ωmax| =

1
2

(210)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

which is achieved at wavenumbers corresponding to

(k · vA)2

max = Ω2

(cid:20)
1 −(cid:16) κ

2Ω

(cid:17)4(cid:21)

,

for a displacement eigenvector corresponding to

ξR = −ξφ,

46

(211)

(212)

Though we have not shown it here, this applies to the case of any magnetic ﬁeld
geometry, including a purely toroidal ﬁeld (Balbus & Hawley 1998).
In other words:

Instability occurs only in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld, but neither the instability
criterion, nor the maximum growth rate, nor the most unstable displacement eigenvector
depend upon any properties of the magnetic ﬁeld, including its geometry.

Now all of this is one whopping surprise, and the fact that none of this
was even remotely anticipated undoubtedly contributed to preliminary MRI work
languishing uninvestigated for more than thirty years, despite some interesting leads
on global instabilities of axial magnetic ﬁelds in Couette experiments (Velikhov 1959,
Chandrasekhar 1961). Chandrasekhar’s text, for example, noted in passing that the
Rayleigh criterion was not recovered in the limit B → 0, speculated that ﬁeld-freezing
ought to be involved somehow, and left it at that.

These seemingly remarkable properties of the MRI can be understood with the
help of a simple physical model. We have noted that the acceleration brought on by the
magnetic ﬁeld line tension is identical in form to a simple spring-like coupling in which
the force is proportional to (minus) the displacement. Imagine then two nearby point
masses, connected by a weak spring, which are in orbit about a central mass. The relative
displacement of the two masses would satisfy a system of equations mathematically
identical to (204) and (205). We will refer to the spring constant (per unit mass) as K.
It corresponds to (k · vA)2 in the MHD system.

Let mi refer to the mass that is orbiting slightly closer to the centre and mo to the
mass slightly farther out. The spring pulls back on mi because it is tethered to the more
slowly orbiting mass mo, and forward on mo for the oppositely analogous reason. But
the backward-pulling torque on mi causes it to lose angular momentum, so the mass to
drop to an orbit closer in, where it actually speeds up. Conversely, the forward-pulling
torque on mo causes it to acquire angular momentum, so the mass moves outward to a
more slowly rotating orbit. The net torque between the two masses increases, mi spirals
inward more rapidly, mo spirals out more rapidly, and the process runs away (see ﬁgure
6). The very act of transporting angular momentum from one mass to another by a
reactive, spring-like force is intrinsically unstable.

This description tacitly assumes that the spring constant K is not so large that
there are many oscillations over a time scale rapid compared with an orbital period.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

47

Figure 5. The original 2D numerical MHD simulation by Hawley & Balbus (1991)
showing the fastest growing mode of the magnetorotational instability with an initial
net magnetic ﬁeld in the z-direction. The perturbations grow until they form
channeling solutions which disrupt the initial conﬁguration.
In 3D, the non-linear
saturation of the MRI leads to sustained turbulence and angular momentum transport.

1991ApJ...376..223HSurprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

48

Figure 6. The magnetic force between two orbiting ﬂuid elements may be represented
as a spring-like force connecting two masses. Here, the spring is a simple blue
line, the masses are mi and m0, and the ﬁgure shows the tethered conﬁguration at
three subsequent times, proceeding anticlockwise round the orbit. See text for an
explanation.

Were this the case, the orbital dynamics would become irrelevant, and only the spring-
induced oscillations would matter. Indeed, when k · vA is large, the MHD dispersion
relation reduces to ω2 = (k · vA)2, i.e. only Alfv´en waves are present (cid:107).

Moreover, in the limit of very small K, the instability is still present, but the rate of
growth becomes arbitrarily long. Therefore, there must be a well-tuned value of K that
maximises the angular momentum transfer rate between the masses without causing a
coupling so strong that it isolates the mass pair from the orbital dyanamics, thereby
stabilising the interaction. This value of K, call it Kmax, is in fact the right side of
equation (211). Since Kmax depends only on the properties of Ω, so will the maximum
growth rate |ωmax|. Thus, in the MHD problem, the magnetic ﬁeld strength sets the
absolute scale for the fastest growing wavenumber kmax, but plays no role in determing
|ωmax|.

For the astrophysically important case of Keplerian ﬂow, κ = Ω and

(k · vA)2 = 15Ω2/16,

|ωmax| = 3Ω/4

(Kepler)

(213)

The most rapidly growing wavenumber increases a factor in amplitude of 111 each orbit!
There are a host of surprises associated with the detailed behaviour of the MRI, but
perhaps the biggest of all is the fact that the calculation is worth doing at all: the MRI is
formally present and vigorous in a rotating disc when the magnetic ﬁeld is, it would seem,
(cid:107) Technically, the waves include an Alfv´enic and slow mode branch.

mi	  mo	  mi	  mo	  mi	  mo	  Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

49

“negligibly small.” The perceived complexities of treating a signiﬁcantly magnetised
disc in which an embedded magnetic ﬁeld was generating yet more ﬁeld by radial
shear was the principal reason for avoiding a detailed MHD analysis of accretion discs.
Throughout the 1970s and 80s, the topic remained anathema to most disc theorists.
The understanding that the most salient features of MHD disc theory remain accessible
in the limit B → 0 with k · vA ﬁnite, a regime that marginalises the importance of the
equilibrium magnetic ﬁeld behaviour, was the key realization that started our modern
understanding of accretion disc turbulence.

7.2.4. General axisymmetric disturbances. Using equation (202), the full axisymmetric
problem presents no particular diﬃculties. Equation (205) for ξφ remains valid. The
normal modes have the plane wave form
ξ ∝ exp(ikRR + ikzz − iωt)

(214)

with kRξR + kzξz = 0. The dispersion relation resulting from the z component of (202)
is:

(DP )Dσ +

− 4Ω2(k · vA)2 = 0,

(215)

(cid:20) 1

γρ

k2
k2
z

4 + 2

where

(cid:21)

1

R3Dl2
(cid:18) kR

∂
∂z

− ∂
∂R

kz

(cid:19)

2 = ω2−(k · vA)2, D ≡

,

l2 = R4Ω2,

σ = ln P ρ−γ.(216)

(The R component produces only a longer route to the same equation.) It is telling
to compare the marginal stability condition of equation (215) with and without the
magnetic ﬁeld. In the absence of any magnetic ﬁeld, the marginal stability condition is
simply

(DP )Dσ +

1
γρ

1

R3Dl2 = 0.
(cid:18) ∂P

With x ≡ kR/kz, this may be written as a quadratic equation in x:
1
R3

− γρ
R3

∂P
∂R

∂l2
∂z

∂P
∂z

x2N 2

z +

+ N 2

R +

x
γρ

∂σ
∂z

+

∂R

(cid:19)

where we have introduced the Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a frequencies

z = − 1
N 2
γρ

∂P
∂z

∂σ
∂z

, N 2

R = − 1
γρ

∂P
∂R

∂σ
∂R

(217)

∂l2
∂R

= 0.

(218)

(219)

To ensure stability, the polynomial on the left of (218) should be positive somewhere
and have no zeros for real x. The most economical way of doing this is to insist that the
sum of the x2 coeﬃcient and constant term be positive (then at least one of the terms
must itself be positive), and that the quadratic discriminant (“b2 − 4ac”) is everywhere
negative. The ﬁrst of these requirements is easily written down:

N 2 +

1
R3

∂l2
∂R

> 0, N 2 = − 1
γρ

(∇P )·∇σ.

(220)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

50

The second is more of an algebraic challenge and will not be repeated here. The result
of the calculation is the condition (Tassoul 1978, Balbus 1995)

(cid:18) ∂l2

∂R

(cid:19)

− ∂P
∂z

∂σ
∂z

− ∂l2
∂z

∂σ
∂R

> 0.

(221)

The motivated reader who may wish to verify this directly should note that equation
(180) is needed on more than one ocassion in the course of the derivation.

Normally, −∂P/∂z > 0, so that equation (221) states that the φ component of
∇σ×∇l2 should be positive for stability. An example of such a stable conﬁguration is
l2 increasing from the rotation axis, stratiﬁed on constant R cylinders, with a spherically
symmetric entropy proﬁle increasing outward. Should the σ gradient acquire a negative
z component with a positive R component, the same angular momentum distribution
would be unstable.

The surprise comes when we add a weak but otherwise arbitrary magnetic ﬁeld,
with at least some poloidal component. Repeating our calculation in exactly the same
way, but now including the (k · vA)2 terms in equation (215), leads to the following
stability criteria (Balbus 1995; see also Fricke 1969, Acheson & Hide 1973, Papaloizou
& Szuszkiewicz 1992):

N 2 +

− ∂P
∂z

∂Ω2
∂ ln R

(cid:18) ∂Ω2

∂R

> 0,

∂σ
∂z

− ∂Ω2
∂z

∂σ
∂R

(cid:19)

> 0.

(222)

(223)

The sole diﬀerence between (220)-(221) and (222)-(223) is that the l gradients have been
replaced by Ω gradients! This is remarkable considering the general disposition of the
magnetic ﬁeld, but there is a certain logical consistency to all this: by tethering ﬂuid
elements, the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld creates a pathway tapping into the true
free energy source in this problem, which is the shear itself. We encountered a similar
phenomenon in our study of magnetothermal behaviour, in which the stability went
from being regulated by a conserved quantity gradient (the entropy) to a free energy
gradient (the temperature).

Free energy gradients are special. Not only do they make life possible, they are
palpable in a way that entropy or angular momentum gradients are not: they hurt. The
extreme unpleasantness of a punch in the nose is due to the free energy source provided
by the relative shear present between one person’s head and another’s ﬁst. A burn from
a hot stove is a thermal counterpart. It is not the large entropy diﬀerence that gives us
pain, it is dT . We don’t particularly care about how many microstates gives rise to the
stove’s macrostate, the salient feature is that it is hot. It is interesting, therefore, that
while free energy gradients normally make their presence known in ﬂuids only through
rather ghostly diﬀusive eﬀects (thermal conduction and viscosity), a magnetic ﬁeld is a
catalyst for turning them into agents of active dynamical destabilisation.

Equations (220) an (221) are known as the Høiland Criteria for the stability (Tassoul
1978); so (222) and (223) may be thought of as magnetic Høiland Criteria. They pertain

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

51

to axisymmetric perturbations, and this is one case where we must closely heed to this
restriction. Our next surprising example will show why.

7.3. Convection and rotation

We return once again to the master equation (198 et seq.) to consider nonaxisymmetric
perturbations in rotating but nonshearing systems. The space-time dependence of our
displacements is now exp i(kRR + mφ + kzz − ωt). Choosing any two components of
this equation together with the mass conservation condition (200) leads to a dispersion
relation quite analogous to the general axisymmetric condition (215), but with the
addition of one more remarkable term proportional to m2:

(cid:20)k2

z
k2

(cid:18) 1

γρ

4+2

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

(DP )Dσ − 4Ω2

+

m2

γρR2k2∇P·∇σ

−4

k2
z

k2 Ω2(k · vA)2 = 0.(224)

R+k2

z +m2/R2. This is the magnetised version (Balbus & Schaan 2012)
where now k2 = k2
of a classical result due to Cowling (1951), but this is one classic whose lessons have not
been fully absorbed. What we should learn from (224) is that moderate rotation cannot
stabilise an unfavourable alignment of the pressure and entropy gradients (entropy
and pressure increasing in the same direction). This is because purely azimuthal
wavenumbers with kz = 0 are apparently immune to Coriolis forces. This is all the
more surprising because when kR = 0 as well, the growth rate is the maximum possible.
In the case of a slowly rotating star like the Sun, in which the background pressure
gradient is (spherically) radial to a part in 105, the ﬂuid displacements associated
with this maximum growth rate are also radial to the same high level of accuracy.
Coriolis deﬂections surely ought to produce distortions much larger than this! So what
is happening?

What is happening is that a condition well-known to geophysicists is being set-
up: geostrophic balance. Latitudinal and longitudinal motions on the Earth’s surface
are subject to the Coriolis force due to the planet’s rotation. A time steady balance
can be achieved between this velocity dependent force and the pressure gradient. This
gives rise, in the northern hemisphere, to clockwise circulating high pressure regions
and counterclockwise circulating low pressure regions. (The pressure gradient force is
balanced by a velocity ﬂow along isobars.) Here, “heliostrophic balance” is achieved
by balancing the azimuthal Coriolis term 2Ω ˙ξr with (1/ρr)(∂P/∂φ), and there is no φ
deﬂection. The radial equation of motion therefore has no Coriolis term, and is instead
a simple balance between the radial acceleration and the unstable buoyancy force. As
far as ﬂuid element displacements are concerned, it is as though the Coriolis force were
absent.

That ought to be a surprise, and more than a bit unsettling. As we shall see in the
next section, there is evidence that the Sun is a few degrees warmer on average at the
poles compared with the equator. This is often said to be a consequence of the Coriolis
force: after all, it must be easier for a hot, outwardly rising gas parcel to move parallel
to the rotation axis at high latitudes toward the pole then for it to move orthogonal to

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

52

the rotation axis at lower latitudes toward the equator. If so, it is a more subtle process,
for we have just seen that there is nothing in the simplest version of buoyant instability
to suggest that Coriolis forces have any aﬀect on the most rapidly moving convective
blobs.

Remember, these considerations apply only to uniform rotation. Does background
shear at a level present in the Sun make a diﬀerence? Indeed it does. That however
brings its own plate of surprises, which we will discuss in section 9.

8. The Papaloizou-Pringle Instability

The Coriolis force exerts a powerful stabilising inﬂuence on the linear response of
Keplerian or near-Keplerian discs. A constant density disc, for example, responds
to perturbations with propagating inertial waves driven by the angular momentum
gradient, and there are no linear instabilities.

Matters are no longer so straightforward when a boundary is present, which will
bring in its own dynamical behaviour. One such remarkable instability was discovered by
Papaloizou & Pringle in 1984. It caused a great stir at the time, because it demonstrated
that a then-popular (non-Keplerian) disc model of launching jets was in fact quite
unstable. The Papaloizou-Pringle instability is surprisingly subtle, yet, as shown by
Goldreich, Goodman, & Narayan (1986), occurs in very simple systems. Our inventory
of gas dynamical surprises would be incomplete without at least a cursory visit.

8.1. Setting the stage

Start with a standard disc. For simplicity, we will take the density to be constant. We
ignore vertical structure, so the disc is really an axial cylinder. The radial extent of
the disc is assumed to be very narrow. The mid-radius will be denoted as R0, and at a
radius R in the disc we deﬁne a local Cartesian coordinate by R = R0 + x with x (cid:28) R0.
The central rotation rate Ω0 is given by

Ω2

0 =

GM
R3
0

,

(225)

where M is the central mass. Expanding to linear order around R0,

Ω = Ω0(1 − qx/R0).

(226)
We introduce the enthalpy function, dH = dP/ρ, where as usual P is pressure and ρ
density. Then the equation of motion for the unperturbed ﬂow may be written

RΩ2 =

dH
dR

+

GM
R3 ,

or, expanding to leading order in x:

dH
dx

= (3 − 2q)Ω2

0x.

This is our formal background equilibrium condition.

(227)

(228)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

53

Consider Eulerian velocity perturbations δu with radial (x) and azimuthal (y)
components. The perturbed enthalpy is denoted δH. A perturbed variable δQ, is
assumed to have a space-time dependence of

δQ(x, y, t) = δQ(x) exp[ik(y−RΩ0t)−iωt] = δQ(x) exp[iky−i(ω+kRΩ0)t](229)

We work in an inertial frame, so the eﬀective frequency has a rotational kinematic boost
kRΩ0 included. Note the distinction between Ω0 and Ω, and the use of R, as opposed
to R0.

The equation of mass conservation is

d(δux)

dx

+ ikδuy = 0.

Introducing the notation

˜ω = ω + qΩkx,

the equations of motion may be taken from (184) and (185):

− i˜ωδux − 2Ωδuy = −d(δH)
dx
δux = −ikδH,
− i˜ωδuy +

,

κ2
2Ω

(230)

(231)

(232)

(233)

where κ2 is given by (208), and we have dropped the “0” subscript on Ω, now a constant.

Eliminating δH and δuy from (230)–(233) yields a Laplace equation for δux:

d2(δux)

dx2 − k2δux = 0.

(234)

Surprisingly, since the equations depend upon x through ˜ω, this is independent of
everything except the constant wavenumber k. The general solution is a superposition
of sinh and cosh functions:

δux = A cosh(kx) + B sinh(kx)

(235)

A similar result is found for surface water waves (Lighthill 1978), a consequence of
divergence- and curl-free ﬂow. As with water waves, the crucial dynamics here lies in
the free surface boundary condition: the Lagrangian change in the pressure (or enthalpy
here) must vanish. In other words, at the free surface x = ±s,

,

(236)

δH = −ξ

dH
dx

iδux

.

(cid:18)

where ξ is the radial displacement,

ξ =

(237)
and dH/dx is the equilibrium enthalpy proﬁle (228). Expressing (236) in terms of δux
yields

˜ω

˜ω2 d(δux)
dx

+

k ˜ω

+ k2 dH

dx

κ2
2Ω

(cid:19)

δux = 0.

(238)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics
54
applied at x = ±s, the thin disc boundaries. The emergent dispersion relation, in the
limit ks → 0, is

ω4 − Ω2ω2 + 3(3 − q2)k2s2Ω4 = 0.

√

(239)

3 = 1.732 (Papaloizou &
The condition for unstable modes to be present is simply q >
Pringle 1985). This contrasts with the local Rayleigh instability criterion of q > 2. It is
easier to destabilise the ﬂow if the disc boundaries are free. (An example of Papaloizou-
Pringle instabilities in protostellar discs is discussed by Lyra & Mac Low [2012], in which
the instability is mediated by Rossby-like modes.)

Goldreich et al. (1986) provided a detailed physical explanation for how this arises.
It depends on the fact that a wave propagating through a moving ﬂuid can either
increase the local energy density on average, in which case it is a positive energy wave,
or it can decrease the energy density, in which case it is a negative energy wave. The
3 corresponds to the appearance of regions of both positive
onset of instability for q >
and negative perturbation energy densities, lying on either side of a so-called corotation
radius. Energy ﬂows from the region of negative energy, and the loss causes an increase
in amplitude, i.e., it is yet more negative. The energy ﬂows into the region of positive
energy density, also increasing its amplitude. In other words, the ﬂow of energy from
the negative to the positive energy region is intrinsically unstable!

√

The enlightening surprise here is that although one’s intuition can be shaped by
local ﬂow behaviour, under conditions in which the edge of the system is well-deﬁned,
entirely new dynamics can appear. In the particular example we have analysed, it might
be said that conditions were artiﬁcial and certainly not directly applicable to any known
astrophysical environment. But the physical content of the Goldreich et al. explanation
suggests that this casual dismissal misses the point. The key notion is one of trapped
waves, the existence of ﬁnite regions in waves of positive or negative energy density are
conﬁned. In the problem we chose this was set up in a simple way by the use of edge
dynamics; more complex examples might involve forming such regions by appropriate
background gradients in the equilibrium ﬂow. The elegant physics responsible for the
destabilisation is just the same.

8.2. Another example

There is more to learn and more interesting surprises to be found with our simple
example. Consider the same problem, this time with a hard wall in place at x = 0,
so that the local relevant boundary condition is δux = 0. Then δux is proportional to
sinh(kx). At x = s, the free surface condition becomes

˜ω2 +

˜ω

κ2
2Ω

+ ksΩ2(3 − 2q)

tanh ks = 0

(240)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

where ˜ω is understood to be evaluated at x = s. This is analogous to the dispersion
relation that emerges for Rayleigh’s surface water waves in a sea of depth s (Lighthill
1978):

ω2 = gk tanh(ks)

(241)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

55

Figure 7. An early numerical MHD simulation by Hawley (1987) showing the
growth of non-axisymmetric density perturbations in a disc. The non-axisymmetric
perturbations grow and create asymmetric structure due to the Papaloizou-Pringle
instability.

where g is the (uniform) gravitational acceleration.
κ2 = 0 and epicylic oscillations are eliminated, our dispersion relation becomes

Indeed, if we set q = 2 so that

˜ω2 = (sΩ2) k tanh(ks),

(242)

the equivalent of water waves (Doppler boosted in frequency by qksΩ) with g = Ω2s.

The surprise comes when we put back the epicyclic waves, creating an interplay
between the two types of response. With κ2 = 2Ω2(2 − q), the boundary condition at

1987MNRAS.225..677HSurprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

x = s becomes the dispersion relation

˜ω2 + ˜ωΩ(2 − q) tanh(ks) + ks tanh(ks)Ω2(3 − 2q) = 0
It suits our present purposes to leave this in terms of ˜ω instead of ω.

56

(243)

Instability corresponds to ω, and thus ˜ω, acquiring a positive imaginary component.

This, in turn, necessitates the condition

Ω2(2 − q)2 − 4ks Ω2 tanh(ks) < 0

or

tanh ks

ks

(3 − 2q)
(2 − q)2

<

(244)

(245)

The left side function has a maximum of 1 at small ks, falling to a minimum of zero
at large ks. There is instability (in fact, overstability), if q < 1.5. Keplerian ﬂow
is once again stable, but uniform rotation (q = 0) is not! The key is the sign of the
pressure gradient: in the presence of a hard wall at the “bottom”, all unstable modes are
characterised by an increasing outward pressure. The edge modes reinforce the epicyclic
oscillations under these conditions—an increasing outward pressure makes the restoring
gravity eﬀectively more powerful—whereas no such reinforcement is present when the
pressure decreases outward.

Even in this very simple system, we have discovered two very diﬀerent types of
instability depending upon which boundary condition is used. One depends upon
extracting the free energy of diﬀerential rotation by the joint presence of positive and
negative energy waves, the other taps into an adverse pressure gradient to mutually
reinforce surface gravity and epicyclic oscillations. The surprise here is that all this
occurs quite apart from local shear instability, the classic focus of the rotational
destabilisation. Boundary conditions, which can be diﬃcult to pin down for accretion
discs, cause qualitative changes in behaviour.

9. Convection and rotation in the Sun

9.1. Helioseismology results

The elucidation of the dynamical state of the Sun’s interior, including a detailed rotation
proﬁle, is one of the most impressive achievements of 20th century astronomy. Not
only do we have more information for the velocity ﬁeld of the Sun then for any other
astrophysical ﬂuid, we have far more information about how the interior of the Sun is
rotating than we have for a typical laboratory ﬂuid experiment! The physics behind this
remarkable observational feat is the ability to extract thousands of global eigenmode
frequencies in the observed acoustic oscillation spectrum of the Sun (Thompson et
al. 2003). Diﬀerences between the frequencies corresponding to diﬀerent azimuthal
wavenumbers then allow the precise angular rotation rate Ω to be determined as a
function of spherical radius r and colatitude θ. By analogy with terrestrial earthquakes,

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

57

Figure 8. Contours of constant angular velocity in the interior of the Sun. The
axes are labelled in units of the solar radius with the x-y axes corresponding to a
R-z cylindrical slice of the Sun respectively (where z is aligned with the solar rotation
axis). The region of strong diﬀerential rotation is limited to the convective zone and
the radiative zone immediately adjacent. The bulk of the radiative interior is, to within
the measurement acuracy, uniform rotation. See text for detailed description.

which allow the Earth’s interior to be probed, the techniques that allow the precision
determination of the Sun’s interior state is known as helioseismology.

Figure (8) shows the results of helioseismology analysis. A meridional slice of the
Sun is depicted. The outermost circular arc is the solar surface. The black interior curves

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

58

are contours of constant angular velocity. (Ignore the white curves for the moment.)
Reckoned in units of nano-Herz (10−9 rotations per second, abbreviation nHz), the
uppermost polar contour is about 320, equatorial rotation is 460, and the intermediate
contours are equally spaced intervals. An average rotation rate of 400 nHz corresponds
to 2.5 × 10−6 s−1, about a one month period. Latitudinal variations amount to some
15%. The question is why do the contours look like this? In particular, why are the
rotation contours so insensitive to depth in the bulk of the outer layers? This will be
our focus here.

The interior of the Sun is distinguished by three principal zones. A small inner
core, comprising some 10% of the Sun’s mass is the region of nuclear energy production.
From this core out to 0.72R(cid:12) the energy diﬀuses outwards at a rate proportional to the
temperature gradient. (The radius of the Sun is denoted R(cid:12).) This region is known
as the radiative zone. The outer 28% of the Sun, the third region, is in a state of
turbulence in which the thermal energy is transported by convection: buoyant hot gas
rising, together with cooler, relatively heavy, gas sinking. This may be thought of
as a sort of boiling due to the intense heating from below. The convective motions
are typically very slow, measured in 10s to 100s of meters per second, because of the
eﬃciency of this mechanical transport process. A tiny velocity can move a great deal of
bulk thermal energy compared with radiative diﬀusion. Very near the surface, however,
convection velocities can become transonic.

Regions of diﬀerent energy transport — diﬀusion, slow convection, rapid convection
— leave their distinctive imprint on the proﬁle of the Sun’s diﬀerential rotation. At the
base of the convective zone and into the radiative zone the rotation is only weakly
dependent on θ. In the bulk of the convective zone, by contrast, where the turbulent
velocity is low, the rotation is only weakly dependent on r. In the near surface layers
there is a strong dependence upon both r and θ. The shear is very marked here.

The question we pose here concerns the simplest portion of the solar rotation
In the bulk of the convection zone, the velocities are very small and the
problem.
stratiﬁcation is adiabatic to a remarkable accuracy: probably about 1 part in 105. This
means that the pressure should be very well described by a barotropic equation of state,
P = P (ρ). Indeed, the near spherical symmetry by itself should be enough to ensure a
barotropic equation of state! Why then is the rotation not stratiﬁed on cylinders?

Start with equation (27) in a dimensionless form:

R

∂(ln Ω2)

∂z

=

1

ρ2Ω2 (∇ρ×∇P )·eφ

(246)

From the helioseismology data, the left side of this equation is a number of order 10%.
The right side, if we simply go by magnitudes and do not worry about the alignment of
the gradients, is a number of order 105 (ratio of gravity to centrifugal forces). The point
is that if there is the slightest misalignment of pressure and density isosurfaces—or,
equivalently, of temperature and density isosurfaces—this will be reﬂected in greatly
magniﬁed, easily observed, baroclinic rotational velocity gradients.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

59

Barotropic rotation (which of course includes uniform rotation) distorts the
temperature and density surfaces from spherical, while still permitting the equilibrium
forces to be derived from a potential
function. This means that isobaric and
isothermal surfaces coincide with one another (and with equipotentials).
This
nonspherical distortion, however, is generally inconsistent with radiative equilibrium
(e.g. Schwarzschild 1958, Clayton 1983).

In a star rotating on cylinders, the fact that pressure and density surfaces coincide
when Ω = Ω(R) may be read oﬀ from equation (27); that these surfaces coincide with
those of the eﬀective potential Φ follows directly from inspection of the hydrostatic
equilibrium equation

where Φ is the eﬀective potential

∇P = −∇Φ

1
ρ

(cid:90) R

Φ = Φg −

R(cid:48)Ω2 dR(cid:48),

(247)

(248)

and Φg the gravitational potential. The radiative ﬂux F may be written in the form

F = −χ∇T = −χ

∇Φ

(249)

where the diﬀusivity χ depends only on ρ and T —and therefore only on Φ. Then,

dT
dΦ

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

∇·F = − d
dΦ

Since

χ

dT
dΦ

∇2Φ = 4πGρ − 1
R

d
dR

∇2Φ.

dT
dΦ

|∇Φ|2 − χ

(cid:0)R2Ω2(cid:1) ,

(250)

(251)

when Ω is constant, everything on the right side of (250) is constant on equipotential
surfaces, except for |∇Φ|2. This latter term can’t possibly be constant, since the
equipotentials are compressed at the poles and distended at the equator. Thus the right
side cannot be identically zero. In the case of Ω = Ω(R), the same surfaces coincide
and the functional constraints imposed by setting ∇·F = 0 are still too restrictive to
be compatible with hydrostatic equilibrium (e.g. Strittmatter & Roxburgh 1966). If
Ω = Ω(R, z) the restrictions break down completely.

Radiative equilibrium is generally thought to be maintained by tiny velocities (less
than terrestrial plate tectonics) of meridional, or Eddington-Sweet, circulation. The
classical argument, as presented by Schwarzschild (1958) and others, is based on tapping
the star’s thermal energy gradient source to move matter in bulk to oﬀset radiative
imbalance. However, it is not energy per se that is needed, it is in particular heat—i.e.,
entropy. It is much more diﬃcult to satisfy the radiative entropy equation. The focus
here is on the region where the entropy gradient would vanish in a star with barotropic
rotation, so any bulk motion is locally ineﬀective. What then? One solution is that
the rotation proﬁle could become baroclinic. Curiously, this is just what the solar data
show, in just the right location.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

60

(cid:18) ∂σ

(cid:19)

Let us return to (181), but using spherical coordinates on the right side:

∂Ω2
∂z

1
γρr

∂P
∂θ

− ∂σ
∂θ

∂P
∂r

.

R

=

∂r

(252)
The advantage of using the entropy variable σ = ln P ρ−γ is that in the convective zone
down to the radiative boundary the spherical r-gradient of σ is very small or zero (at
the boundary itself). This is due to the great eﬃciency of the convective process: a
gradient of order σ/r would produce an energy ﬂow huge in comparison with the Sun’s.
On the right side of the above equation we need only retain the term involving ∂P/∂r.
Switching to spherical coodinates,

∂Ω2
∂z

g
γr

∂σ
∂θ

R

=

(253)
where g = −(1/ρ)(∂P/∂r) is the dominant radial gravitational ﬁeld magnitude.
Equation (253) is known as the thermal wind equation, widely used in geophysics
(Pedlosky 1987). The eﬃciency of convection is invoked explicitly by ignoring the term
in ∂P/∂θ, and tacitly by ignoring convective velocities in the equation of motion, which
assumes hydrostatic equilibrium. For present purposes, we note that an axial gradient
in the angular velocity is intimately associated with latitudinal gradients in the entropy.
This has important consequences for understanding radiative equilibrium at convective-
radiative boundary.

Near the radiative boundary, the Sun’s rotation is strongly baroclinic. As such,
there is no reason why a strict radiative equilibrium could not be enforced. The argument
against this—that the heat ﬂux divergence cannot vanish everywhere on a common
equipotential/isothermal surface (Schwarzschild 1958)—breaks down for baroclinic ﬂow,
because equipotentials are not isothermal surfaces. Indeed, one could turn the argument
on its head. Why is the Sun’s rotation baroclinic at all? One answer might be that
since the entropy gradient vanishes at the radiative/convective boundary in a barotropic
model of solar rotation,
it is ineﬀective for circulation to oﬀset a ﬁnite heat ﬂux
divergence. The rotation proﬁle Ω(r, θ) must then alter itself non-barotropically until
the heat ﬂux divergences vanishes. In this view, altered rotation, not the appearance
of circulation, is the key to the energetics, and the region remains in strict radiative
balance.

That there are plausible grounds for expecting steady non-circulating rotation
patterns were put forth long ago (e.g. Roxburgh 1964, 1966; Roxburgh & Strittmatter
1966), but they seem to have faded with time owing to problems of stability. These
proﬁles see at face value to be vulnerable to the Goldreich-Schubert-Fricke (GSF)
instability (Goldrecih & Schubert 1967, Fricke 1968), which aﬄicts rotational ﬂow
not stratiﬁed on cylinders, i.e. baroclinic ﬂow. More recently, the question of the
stability of baroclinic rotation in the upper radiative zone was raised by Caleo, Balbus,
& Potter (2015), who calculated the explicit form of rotation proﬁles using static
radiative equilibrium as a requirement. Within the uncertainties of the helioseismology
observations, it is not diﬃcult to reproduce the observed rotation proﬁle by imposing

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

61

diﬀusive radiative equilibrium. Moreover, their baroclinic form, the Caleo et al. (2015)
proﬁles seem to be locally GSF stable in the upper radiative zone—with or without a
magnetic ﬁeld (Caleo & Balbus 2016). The more complex question of global stability
is not yet resolved. There is no consensus model of this radiative/convective transition
zone, known as the tachocline, at the time of this writing. It is a very lively ﬁeld of
investigation.

9.2. Solution of the thermal wind equation

Surprisingly, the thermal wind equation (253) can be solved in a very useful way for
the bulk of the solar convection zone. Let us begin by asking what convection actually
does, both thermally and dynamically.

Thermally, convection redistributes entropy (S) from a higher S to a lower S region.
Doing so tends to ﬂatten the radial entropy gradient, but does not eliminate it. Some
slightly negative (unstable) gradient is required to maintain convection, but this gradient
is very tightly regulated. It must allow precisely one solar luminosity worth of thermal
energy to pass through the convective zone via convective transport. A small change in
the gradient would produce a large change in the outward heat ﬂux.

What eﬀect does rotation have? One might guess that Coriolis forces act more
adversely against motion perpendicular to the axis of rotation than motion along the
axis. In that case, the poles of the Sun should perhaps be slightly warmer than the
equator. The data suggest, in fact, that they are.

The surprise here has been previewed in section 7.3, namely there is nothing in
the dynamics of the linear theory of convection to suggest that this is what actually
happens. For a uniformly rotating model of a star, Cowling (1951) made a point of
noting this, now almost 65 years ago! The most rapidily growing mode associated with
the dispersion relation (224) corresponds to radial displacements and purely azimuthal
(eimφ) wavenumbers. Balbus & Schaan (2012) showed the same state of aﬀairs prevails
even in a star undergoing barotropic shear, Ω = Ω(R). (More precisely, they showed
that there was no eﬀect of the shear to linear order in ∂Ω/∂r.) The Coriolis force is
anulled by the oﬀsetting azimuthal pressure gradient in the φ equation of motion, a
state of geostrophic balance, common in planetary atmospheres and oceanography. But
without a φ velocity, there is no Coriolis term in the radial force equation to deﬂect hot
parcels poleward! So why are the poles warmer in the Sun? Shall we simply put it down
to nonlinear complications?

As neither uniform rotation nor barotropic diﬀerential rotation aﬀects the behaviour
of the most rapidly growing convective displacements, the last possibility is baroclinic
diﬀerential rotation. Does a z gradient cause any departures from radial motion to
leading linear order?

Indeed it does. Balbus & Schaan (2012) carried out the analysis and found that

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

ξr

the components of the displacement vector ξ satisfy the equations

¨ξr =

− 1
ργ

∂P
∂r

∂σ
∂r

¨ξθ = R

∂Ω2
∂z

t ˙ξr

62

(254)

(255)

so that there is a slight (northern) poleward drift of high entropy elements when
∂Ω2/∂z < 0, as it is throughout most of the (northern) convective zone. This appears
to show a nicely self-consistent feature, namely that the convergence of high entropy
ﬂuid parcels at the poles could serve to raise the local temperature by a few degrees
and maintain the small latitudinal entropy gradient needed for baroclinic rotation in
the ﬁrst place.

To understand why the z gradient appears whereas the R gradient does not, recall
that we are dealing with embedded perturbations in a shearing medium. Under these
circumstances, the wavenumber of a perturbation is sheared with the medium itself
(see equation [193]). The relevant perturbations are dominated by the azimuthal m
wavenumber, so that the poloidal components kR and kz are directly proportional to
∇Ω. The coupling to the diﬀerential rotation disappears when kz does, so it is this
purely kinematic relationship between kz and ∂Ω/∂z that brings baroclinic shear eﬀects
into our problem.

Let us return now to the helioseismology data of ﬁgure [8]. What is striking is that
in the bulk of the convective zone the isorotation curves seem to resemble convective
cells: predominantly radial, but with a slight poleward bias. In fact, Balbus & Schaan
(2012) show both that the perturbed Eulerian azimuthal velocity δvφ is very small
and that it is proportional to ˙ξ·∇Ω. In other words, the ﬂuid element displacement
velocities tend to lie in constant Ω surfaces This of course means that the elements
do not conserve their individual angular momenta. There is no mystery here; it is
due to the presence of strong azimuthal pressure gradients. This also means that the
ξ · ∇Ω2 term in equation (203) is very small: the excess centrifugal term is minimised
as the elements move radially. There are thus neither important Coriolis nor important
centrifugal eﬀects to disrupt the convective dynamics.

What a convective ﬂuid parcel is trying to do is to eliminate the entropy gradient,
as we have discussed. Both because the radial entropy gradient is tightly regulated and
because there is a latitudinal entropy gradient, we expect that within a (nearly radial)
convective cell the radial behaviour of the entropy proﬁle will be given by some function,
σr(r) say, with a (nearly) constant oﬀset, i.e.,

σ = σr + constant

(256)

The “constant” need not be the same constant at each latitude of course—indeed it
cannot be, if ∂σ/∂θ is present. Moreover, the convective mixing process itself has
no eﬀect whatsoever on this entropy constant;
it is the entropy gradient along the
gravitational ﬁeld that is aﬀected. The latitudinal entropy gradient may need to be
present to drive baroclinic ﬂow, thereby ensuring radiative equilibrium in the presence

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

63

of ineﬀective meridional circulation in the upper radiative zone. What emerges in the
convective zone is a picture in which ﬂuid elements move in surfaces of constant Ω and
at the same time in surfaces of constant σ − σr (Balbus et al. 2009). We shall refer
to this diﬀerence as “residual entropy,” δσ. Since only the θ gradient appears in the
thermal wind equation (253), we may replace σ with δσ on the right side. Our reasoning
then suggests that we investigate solutions of (253) with its right side a function f of
Ω2 only:

∂σ
∂θ

≡ ∂δσ
∂θ

=

∂f (Ω2)

∂θ

=

(257)

(cid:18) df

(cid:19) ∂Ω2

dΩ2

∂θ

(cid:19) ∂Ω2

(cid:19)

gf(cid:48)

gf(cid:48)

(cid:18)tan θ

(cid:18)tan θ

∂Ω2
∂r

−

= −

dθ
dr

At the poles and the equator, this ansatz must be true just by the symmetry of our
problem. The real content applies to the bulk of the convective zone, away from these
symmetry regions.

Combining equations (253) and (257) and switching to fully spherical coordinates,

r

+

(258)
where we have written f(cid:48) for df /dΩ2. Equation (258) is an equation for precisely what we
would like to know: the isorotation contours of Ω2. In particular, Ω2 must be constant
on the characteristic curve given by

γr2 sin θ cos θ

= 0

∂θ

+

(259)
Now f(cid:48) is not known, but as it depends only upon Ω2, we may be sure that along the
curve of interest, f(cid:48) is a constant. So equation (259) is a perfectly well-posed ordinary
diﬀerential equation. Moreover, despite is awkward appearance, it folds up nicely:

γr2 sin θ cos θ

r

d(r2 sin2 θ)

dr

= −2f(cid:48)

γ

g = −2f(cid:48)

γ

dΦ
dr

(260)

where we have assumed that g, the gravitational ﬁeld strength, is a function of r; Φ(r)
is the potential. Our equation integrates immediately to

r2 sin2 θ ≡ R2 = A + BΦ(r)

where A is an integration constant and

B = −2f(cid:48)/γ > 0

(261)

(262)

is in practice a parameter to be ﬁt from the data (in principle known from turbulence
theory) and B is positive since f(cid:48) is negative.

The surprise here is how simple equation (261) is. After a lengthy and somewhat
laboured discursion of the nature of convection and rotation (motivated by linear theory)
we come to the conclusion that the isorotation contours are curves on which R2 is a linear
function of the potential! For the Sun, 98% of the mass is below the convective zone, so
to an excellent degree of approximation, Φ = −GM(cid:12)/r, where M(cid:12) is the mass of the
Sun. If Ω2 is speciﬁed as a function of θ on some surface r = r0, as it must be for a

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

64

proper formulation of the solution of this class of partial diﬀerential equation, then the
characteristic isorotation curves may be written

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

1 − r0
r

r2 sin2 θ ≡ R2 = r2

0 sin2 θ0 + βr2
0

where

β = −2f(cid:48)GM

γr3
0

(263)

(264)

is a dimensionless number of order unity and θ0 is the value of θ at the start of the
contour. The β parameter must be constant along a contour, but can vary from one
contour to another with f(cid:48)(Ω2).

Even without any detailed calculations, it is clear that equation (263) has the right
kind of properties to account for the general appearance of the solar isorotation contours.
As r increases, the dominant balance is between R2 and the constants on the right, i.e.
the ﬂow tends toward constant on cylinders. As R becomes small near the rotation axis,
the dominant balance is between the 1/r and constant terms on the right, i.e. the ﬂow
tends toward constant rotation on spherical surfaces.

Using only one free parameter to ﬁt to the entire Sun, β = 0.55, the match is
already quite striking (e.g. Balbus, Latter, & Weiss 2012). If we allow ourselves the
indulgence of a three parameter polynomial ﬁt for the same region:

β = A + B sin θ + C sin2 θ

(265)

the result is nearly perfect (the white curves in ﬁgure 8), apart from the boundary
layers. This level of agreement suggests that the basic assumptions of the theory— the
validity of the thermal wind equation and the sharing of angular velocity and residual
entropy surfaces—is basically sound. Thus, this is a potentially useful approach for
analysing the rotation proﬁles arising in many other problems involving convection and
rotation. The surprise here has been that the dynamics of a complicated turbulent
system has allowed itself to be encapsulated in such a simple mathematical prescription:
σ(cid:48) = f (Ω2) plus thermal wind balance is enough to understand the shapes of the Sun’s
isorotation contours.
In displaying its isorotational contours, the Sun is acting like
a great analogue computer, graphically presenting the solution characteristics of the
thermal wind equation.

10. Concluding remarks

The dedicated reader will be aware of the recurring lessons running through many
of these problems. Among the most signiﬁcant is the remarkable dichotomy between
problems in which a simple, naive treatment works wonders because of the insensitivity
of the problem to anything but the dominant dynamical forces (i.e. the Newcomb-Parker
Instability); and, in sharp contrast, problems in which the inclusion of a subtle dynamical
or microphysical eﬀect discretely and profoundly changes the behaviour of a system (i.e.
weak magnetic ﬁelds). One of the reasons that, regardless of one’s experience, the

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

65

subject of astrophysical gasdynamics is so rich, counterintuitive and surprising, is that
it is rarely obvious a priori which of these two regimes a particular problem will fall into.
Even an intuition honed by experience can be led astray by the underlying complex or
delicate interactions amongst diﬀerent dynamical and thermal processes, which may be
on very distinct timescales. Starting afresh with a more careful and rigorous approach
is then necessary.

The potent ability of weak magnetic ﬁelds to destabilise otherwise stable
conﬁgurations is particularly striking. That magnetic ﬁelds wield such a profound
inﬂuence seems bizarre, how can it make any diﬀerence when the magnetic energy
density is such a tiny fraction of the thermal energy density? The answer lies not in
strength, but in the new degrees of freedom that a ﬁeld imparts to a ﬂuid. A magnetic
ﬁeld needn’t compete with pressure.
Instead it propagates disturbances through the
gas strictly on its own terms, in the form of an Alfv´en wave. These are shear modes,
without any hydrodynamic counterpart to compete with. Masses on linked springs are
standard models for solids and magnetic media, both of which are in turn venues for
propagating elastic waves. Hydrodynamic ﬂuids are not.

Another important lesson to bear in mind is the surprising ability of gravity to
reverse the eﬀects of usually straightforward interactions. Remember that the world
of orbital dynamics is one in which pulling on a body in the direction of its motion
slows it down and hindering its motion speeds it up.
In a gravitationally stratiﬁed
medium adding heat to a body can lower its temperature and extracting heat can raise
it. Forces that are attractive in a static environment become repulsive in a rotating one,
and ordinary thermal conduction can enhance temperature diﬀerences in the presence
of gravitational ﬁelds. These already counterintuitive systems are further complicated
with added magnetic degrees of freedom. It is, in retrospect, perhaps not surprising
that so many new instabilities appear in the weak magnetic ﬁeld regime. It is all but
certain that there will be more to follow, and that we don’t yet fully understand the
consequences of the ones we already supposedly know about.

Beware of instabilities that appear simple but are in fact complex. A slowly evolving
process may be hypersensitve to the background equilibrium state and especially to its
microphysics. Many of the most knotty current problems of theoretical astrophysics, for
example, involve the thermal behaviour of astrophysical plasmas. On the other hand,
physics is full of examples in which complexity is only apparent. Once established, it is
usually the case that fundamental explanations are rarely unduly complicated. On the
contrary, they generally seem embarrassingly obvious. What ever was the problem in
the ﬁrst place? How could so many clever people have overlooked that? For shame! How
unfortunate that our current problems are ever so much more complicated. Let naivity be
a guide and maintain a playful spirit. There are patterns and constraints to be discerned.
Linear theory can be surprisingly helpful, so make sure it is understood before taking
on a full analysis. Unless we have been the victim of coincidences, the example of solar
rotation oﬀers hope that the days of pencil and paper analysis remain viable even in
domains normally viewed as the province of large scale numerical simulation.

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

66

The current trend in our discipline has been to ever larger numerical simulations,
and ever more strained rationalisations attempting to justify additions and alterations
to the governing equations so that the desired answers appear. Some of this is perhaps
inevitable as our ambitions continue to mount; the course of time will tell us whether
this is a healthy trend. In the meanwhile, one would do well to distinguish between a
subtle explanation and a complicated one. Genuine solutions to profound puzzles are
usually the former, and only occassionally the latter. When they are the latter, they
will, as a rule, involve the former as well.

Finally, we should never forget the wisdom of the ancients. There is still much
to learn from the investigations that have attained classic status. The challenge may
simply be to recognise the same underlying physics in what may be a very diﬀerent or
somewhat more general setting.

Astrophysical ﬂuid dynamics is teeming with tractable but unsolved problems.
Regardless of our methods, there will always be a need for powerful—and often simple—
insights. We may all look forward to the surprises to come.

11. Acknowledgements

SAB acknowledges support from a gift from the Hinze Charitable Fund and a grant from
the Royal Society in the form of a Wolfson Research Merit award. WJP acknowledges
funding from University College, Oxford in the form of a Junior Research Fellowship.

References

[1] Acheson, D. J. 1990, Elementary Fluid Dynamics, (Clarendon Press: Oxford)
[2] Acheson, D. J. 1973 & Hide, R., Rep. Prog. Phys., 36, 159
[3] Avila, M. 2013, Pys. Rev. Lett. 108(12), 124501
[4] Balbus, S. A. 1985, ApJ, 291, 518
[5] Balbus, S. A. 1995, ApJ, 453, 380
[6] Balbus, S. A. 2000, ApJ, 534, 420
[7] Balbus, S. A. 2001, ApJ, 562, 909
[8] Balbus, S. A., Bonart, J., Latter, H., & Weiss, N. O. 2009, MNRAS, 400, 176
[9] Balbus, S. A. & Hawley, J. F. 1991, ApJ, 376, 214
[10] Balbus, S. A. & Hawley, J. F. 1998, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 1
[11] Balbus, S. A., Hawley, J. F., & Stone, J. M. 1996, ApJ, 467, 76
[12] Balbus, S. A., Latter, H., & Weiss, N. 2012, MNRAS, 420, 2457
[13] Balbus, S. A. & Schaan, E. 2012, MNRAS, 426, 1546
[14] Balbus, S. A. & Soker, N. 1989, ApJ, 341, 611
[15] Bender, C. M. and Orszag, S. A. 1978, Advanced Mathematical Methods for Scientists and

Engineers, (New York: McGraw-Hill)

[16] Blitz, L. & Shu, F. H. 1980, ApJ, 238, 148
[17] Braginskii, S. I. 1965, Rev. Plasma Phys., 1, 205
[18] Brown, B. P.,Vasil, G. M., & Zweibel, E. G. 2012, ApJ, 756, 109
[19] Caleo, A. & Balbus, S. A. 2016, MNRAS, 457, 1711
[20] Caleo, A., Balbus, S. A., & Potter, W. J. 2015, MNRAS, 448, 2077
[21] Chandrasekhar, S. 1961, Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic Stability (New York: Clarendon)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

67

[22] Clayton, D. D. 1983, Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nuclear Synthesis (Chicago: University

of Chicago)

[23] Cowie, L.L. & Binney, J. 1977, ApJ, 215, 723
[24] Cowie, L. L. & McKee, C. F. 1977, ApJ, 211, 135
[25] Cowling, T. G. 1951 ApJ, 114 272
[26] Defouw, R. J. 1970, ApJ, 160, 659
[27] Field, G. B. 1965, ApJ, 142, 53
[28] Field, G. B., Goldsmith, D. W., & Habing, H. J. 1969, ApJ, 155, 149
[29] Fricke, K. 1968, Z. Astrophys., 68, 317
[30] Fricke, K. 1969, A&A, 1, 388
[31] Goldreich, P., Goodman, J., & Narayan, R. 1986, MNRAS, 221, 339
[32] Goldreich, P. & Schubert, G. 1967, ApJ, 150, 571
[33] Hawley, J. F. & Balbus, S. A. 1991, ApJ, 376, 223
[34] Hawley, J. F. 1987, MNRAS, 225 677
[35] Islam, T. & Balbus, S. 2005, ApJ, 633, 328
[36] Ji, H., Burin, M., Schartman, E., & Goodman, J. 2006, Nature, 444, 343
[37] Latter, H. N. & Kunz, M. W. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 1964
[38] Lesur, G. & Longaretti, P.-Y. 2005, A& A, 444, 25
[39] Lighthill, J. 1978, Waves in Fluids (Cambridge University: Cambridge)
[40] Lynden-Bell, D. & Ostriker, J. P. 1967, MNRAS, 136, 293
[41] Lyra, W. & Mac Low, M-M. 2012, ApJ, 756, 62
[42] Mayer, F. J. 1982, Phys. Rev. Lett., 48, 20, 1400
[43] McCourt, M., Parrish, I. J., Sharma, P. & Quatert, E. 2011, MNRAS, 413, 1295
[44] Mouschovias, T. Ch. 1974, ApJ, 192, 37
[45] Newcomb, W. A. 1961, Phys. Fluids, 4, 391
[46] Nordsiek, F., Huisman, S. G., van de Veen, R. C. A., Sun. C., Lohse, D., Lathrop, D. P. 2015,

arXiv 1408.1059

[47] Paoletti, M. S. & Lathrop, D. P. 2011, Phys. Rev. Lett., 106, 024501
[48] Parrish, I. J. & Stone J M. 2007, ApJ, 664, 135
[49] Papaloizou, J. C. B. & Pringle, J. E., 1984, MNRAS, 208, 721
[50] Papaloizou, J. C. B. & Pringle, J. E., 1985, MNRAS, 213, 799
[51] Papaloizou, J. C. B. & Szuszkiewicz, E. 1992 GApFD, 66, 233
[52] Parker, E. N. 1966, ApJ, 145, 811
[53] Pedlosky, J. 1987, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, (Second Edition) (Springer: New York)
[54] Peierls, R. 1979, Surprises in Theoretical Physics, (Princeton University: Princeton)
[55] Peierls, R. 1991, More Surprises in Theoretical Physics, (Princeton University: Princeton)
[56] Quataert, E. 2008, ApJ, 673, 758
[57] Rayleigh, J. W. S. 1916, Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 93, 148
[58] Roxburgh, I. W. 1964, MNRAS, 128, 157
[59] Roxburgh, I. W. 1966, MNRAS, 132, 201
[60] Schartman, E., Ji, H., Burin, M. J., & Goodman, J. 2012, A&A, 543, 94
[61] Schwarzschild, M. 1958, Principles of Stellar Evolution (Dover: New York)
[62] Shapiro, S. A. & Teukolsky, S. L. 1983, Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars: the Physics

of Compact Objects (Wiley-Interscience: New York)

[63] Shu, F. H., 1991, The Physics of Astrophysics, Volume II, Gas Dynamics (University Science:

Milly Valley)

[64] Smythe, W., & Yeh, C. 1972, in American Institute of Physics Handbook, ed. D. E. Gray (McGraw-

Hill: New York), pp. 5–12

[65] Spitzer, L. 1962, Physics of Fully Ionised Gases, (2nd ed.) (Wiley: New York)
[66] Roxburgh, I. W. & Strittmatter, P. A. 1966, MNRAS, 122, 345
[67] Tassoul J.-L. 1978, Theory of Rotating Stars (Princeton University: Princeton)

Surprises in astrophysical gasdynamics

68

[68] Thompson, M. J., Christensen-Dalgaard, J., Miesch, M. S., Toomre, J. 2003, ARA&A, 41, 599
[69] Velikhov, E. P. 1959, Soviet JETP, 36, 995

