Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. griessmeier˙2
March 22, 2016

c(cid:13) ESO 2016

Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II. Atmospheric

J.–M. Grießmeier1,2, F. Tabataba-Vakili3, A. Stadelmann4, J. L. Grenfell5,6, and D. Atri7

implications

1 LPC2E - Universit´e d’Orl´eans / CNRS, 3A, Avenue de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, 45071 Orlans cedex 2, France. e-mail:

jean-mathias.griessmeier@cnrs-orleans.fr

2 Station de Radioastronomie de Nanc¸ay, Observatoire de Paris - CNRS/INSU, USR 704 - Univ. Orl´eans, OSUC, route de Souesmes,

18330 Nanc¸ay, France

Oxford OX1 3PU, UK

3 Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics, Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Clarendon Laboratory, Parks Road,

4 Technische Universit¨at Braunschweig, Mendelssohnstr. 3, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany
5 Zentrum fr Astronomie und Astrophysik (ZAA), Technische Universitt Berlin (TUB), Hardenbergstr. 36, 10623 Berlin, Germany
6 now at: Extrasolare Planeten und Atmosph¨aren (EPA), Institut fr Planetenforschung, Deutsches Zentrum fr Luft- und Raumfahrt

(DLR), Rutherfordstr. 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany

7 Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, 1200 Westlake Ave N Suite 1006, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

Version of March 22, 2016

ABSTRACT

Context. Theoretical arguments indicate that close-in terrestial exoplanets may have weak magnetic ﬁelds. As described in the
companion article (Paper I), a weak magnetic ﬁeld results in a high ﬂux of galactic cosmic rays to the top of the planetary atmosphere.
Aims. We investigate effects that may result from a high ﬂux of galactic cosmic rays both throughout the atmosphere and at the
planetary surface.
Methods. Using an air shower approach, we calculate how the atmospheric chemistry and temperature change under the inﬂuence of
galactic cosmic rays for Earth-like (N2-O2 dominated) atmospheres. We evaluate the production and destruction rate of atmospheric
biosignature molecules. We derive planetary emission and transmission spectra to study the inﬂuence of galactic cosmic rays on
biosignature detectability. We then calculate the resulting surface UV ﬂux, the surface particle ﬂux, and the associated equivalent
biological dose rates.
Results. We ﬁnd that up to 20% of stratospheric ozone is destroyed by cosmic-ray protons. The effect on the planetary spectra,
however, is negligible. The reduction of the planetary ozone layer leads to an increase in the weighted surface UV ﬂux by two orders
of magnitude under stellar UV ﬂare conditions. The resulting biological effective dose rate is, however, too low to strongly affect
surface life. We also examine the surface particle ﬂux: For a planet with a terrestrial atmosphere (with a surface pressure of 1033
hPa), a reduction of the magnetic shielding efﬁciency can increase the biological radiation dose rate by a factor of two, which is non-
critical for biological systems. For a planet with a weaker atmosphere (with a surface pressure of 97.8 hPa), the planetary magnetic
ﬁeld has a much stronger inﬂuence on the biological radiation dose, changing it by up to two orders of magnitude.
Conclusions. For a planet with an Earth-like atmospheric pressure, weak or absent magnetospheric shielding against galactic cosmic
rays has little effect on the planet. It has a modest effect on atmospheric ozone, a weak effect on the atmospheric spectra, and a non-
critical effect on biological dose rates. For planets with a thin atmosphere, however, magnetospheric shielding controls the surface
radiation dose and can prevent it from increasing to several hundred times the background level.
Key words. cosmic rays – exoplanets – Planets and satellites: magnetic ﬁelds – Planets and satellites: atmospheres – Astrobiology –
ozone

1. Introduction

The number of known extrasolar planets is steadily growing, as
is the number of known Earth-like and “Super-Earth” like plan-
ets (i.e. planets with a mass M ≤ 10M⊕) around M-dwarf stars.
Recent estimations based on the Kepler Input Catalog indicate
that the occurrence rate of planets with a radius 0.5R⊕ ≤ R ≤
4R⊕ orbiting an M dwarf in less than 50 days is 0.9+0.04−0.03 plan-
ets per star (Dressing and Charbonneau, 2013). A considerable
number of these planets (∼ 15 to 50%) could be located in the
so-called liquid water habitable zone of their host star.

However, the “classical” deﬁnition of the habitable zone
(e.g., Kasting et al., 1993; Selsis et al., 2007) is based solely
on the potential of having liquid water on the planetary surface
(hence the more precise name of “liquid water habitable zone”).

Clearly, a number of additional factors can also play an impor-
tant role for habitability (see e.g., Lammer et al., 2009, 2010).

One of these additional conditions probably is the presence
of a planetary magnetic ﬁeld. Magnetic ﬁelds on super-Earths
around M-dwarf stars are likely to be weak and short-lived in
the best case or even non-existent in the worst case. The rele-
vance of such ﬁelds and their potential detectability is discussed
elsewhere (Grießmeier, 2014). Here, we look at one habitability-
related consequence of a weak planetary magnetic ﬁeld, namely
the enhanced ﬂux of galactic cosmic-ray (GCR) particles to the
planetary atmosphere, with potential implications ranging from
changes in the atmospheric chemistry to an increase of the radi-
ation dose on the planetary surface.

The effects of GCRs on the planetary atmospheric chem-
istry were calculated by Grenfell et al. (2007a) for N2-O2 atmo-

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
1
2

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
0
0
5
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

spheres. They found that for an unmagnetized planet, GCRs can
reduce the total ozone column by almost 20%, which is not suf-
ﬁcent to strongly inﬂuence the biomarker signature. Thus, they
concluded that biomarkers are robust against GCRs for the sce-
narios studied.

GCRs also lead to a ﬂux of secondary particles which can
reach the planetary surface. The resulting surface radiation dose
was evaluated by Atri et al. (2013). For an Earth-like atmosphere
with a surface pressure of 1033 hPa, they ﬁnd that the absence
of magnetospheric shielding can increase the surface biologi-
cal dose rate by up to a factor of ∼ 2. They also indicate that
atmospheric shielding dominates over magnetospheric shield-
ing; compared to a thin atmosphere (10 times less dense than
on Earth), an atmosphere of 1033 hPa reduces the dose rate by
almost 3 orders of magnitude.

The exact severity of these effects, however, depends on
the particle energy range considered, and on the intrinsic plan-
etary magnetic ﬁeld strength. For planets with a strong mag-
netic ﬁeld, most galactic cosmic-ray particles are deﬂected,
whereas for weakly magnetized planets, the majority of the par-
ticles can reach the planetary atmosphere. In previous work
(Grießmeier et al., 2005, 2009), the ﬂux of galactic cosmic
rays to the atmosphere of extrasolar planets has been evalu-
ated on the basis of a simple estimate for the planetary mag-
netic moment. However, such quantitative estimates of magnetic
ﬁelds can be over-simplistic. More complex approaches, how-
ever, yield values which are not only model-dependent, but also
depend on the precise planetary parameters. For this reason, we
have re-evaluated the cosmic-ray ﬂux in the companion article
(Grießmeier et al., 2015, hereafter “Paper I”), including primary
particles over a wider energy range. More importantly, we now
take a more general approach concerning the planetary magnetic
moment: Instead of applying a model for the planetary mag-
netic moment, we showed how magnetic protection varies as a
function of the planetary magnetic dipole moment, in the range
0.0M⊕ ≤ M ≤ 10.0M⊕ for the magnetic moment, and in the
range of 16MeV ≤ E ≤ 524GeV for the particle energy.
The aim of the current study is to use this greatly ex-
panded parameter range and repeat the analysis of earlier studies
(Grenfell et al., 2007a; Atri et al., 2013). In addition to the new
cosmic-ray ﬂuxes from Paper I, the main differences with re-
spect to the approach of previous work (Grenfell et al., 2007a;
Atri et al., 2013) are the following:
– The climate-chemistry atmospheric model has been updated,

as explained in Section 3.1.

– The calculation of the photochemical response to cosmic
rays has been updated, as summarized in Section 3.1 (see
Tabataba-Vakili et al., 2016, for details).

– We have added the analysis of planetary transmission and

emission spectra (Section 4.2).

– We have added the analysis of surface UV ﬂux, and present
results for UV-A, UV-B, and biologically weighted UV ﬂux
on the planetary surface (Section 4.3).
This paper is organized as follows (see also Figure 1): In
Section 2, we present the planetary parameters used in our cal-
culations. Section 3 decribes the models and numerical tools we
use: The atmospheric chemistry model is discussed in Section
3.1 and the surface particle ﬂux and radiation dose calculation
is presented in Section 3.2. The galactic cosmic-ray ﬂuxes are
computed in Paper I. We discuss the implications of these ﬂuxes
in Section 4, i.e. the modiﬁcation of the atmospheric chem-
istry (Section 4.1), the detectability of biosignature molecules
(Section 4.2), the UV ﬂux at the planetary surface (Section 4.3)

2

Fig. 1. Effects of galactic cosmic rays discussed in this work and
in the companion article (Paper I).

and the surface radiation dose rate (Section 4.4). Section 5 closes
with some concluding remarks.

2. The planetary situation

In Paper I, we calculated a large number of representative cases.
This allows us to study systematically the inﬂuence of the plan-
etary magnetic ﬁeld on the ﬂux of GCRs to the planet. In this
way, we explore the range 0.0M⊕ ≤ M ≤ 10.0M⊕ for the mag-
netic moment, and the range of 16MeV ≤ E ≤ 524GeV for the
particle energy.

The following parameters are kept ﬁxed: the stellar mass
M(cid:63) (M(cid:63) = 0.45M(cid:12)), the stellar radius R(cid:63) (R(cid:63) = 0.41R(cid:12)), and
the orbital distance d (d = 0.153 AU). We are thus looking at
the case of a planet in orbit around a star equivalent to AD
Leonis (an M4.5 dwarf star). In addition, we keep constant the
planetary mass Mp (Mp = 1.0M⊕) and the planetary radius Rp
(Rp = 1.0R⊕). The only planetary or stellar parameter which we
varied in the present study is the planetary magnetic dipole mo-
ment M . The minimum value of the magnetic dipole moment
in this study is 0, which corresponds to an unmagnetized planet.
The maximum value of the magnetic dipole moment we study
is 10 times the present Earth value, which corresponds to an ex-
tremely strongly magnetized planet.

Already for Earth-mass rocky exoplanets, a variety of atmo-
spheric compositions can be envisaged. Super-Earths may have a
very different atmospheric chemistry from Earth. Key processes
expected to inﬂuence their atmosphere include: the origin of the
primary atmosphere, the presence (or absence) of life, the pres-
ence (or absence) of a water ocean, atmospheric escape and the
importance of outgassing (see, e.g., Hu et al., 2012, 2013; Hu
and Seager, 2014). Having a different atmospheric composition
obviously has an effect on cosmic-ray transport and inﬂuence
the atmospheric proﬁles of the biomarker molecules we study.
In this work, we assume an Earth-like atmosphere of 1033 hPa
surface pressure with N2 and O2 as the major constituents, and
with biogenic gas emissions as on modern Earth. The planetary
atmospheric parameters are described in more detail in Section
3.1 and in Rauer et al. (2011).

secondary muonsUV fluxspectrumstrong flux of GCRSection 4.2Section 4.1Section 4.4Section 4.1Section 4.3Paper Idestruction of Ocreation of NOx3weak magnetic fieldPaper IJ.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

3. Models used
In this section, we describe the models used throughout this ar-
ticle. The stellar wind model, magnetic ﬁeld model, and cosmic-
ray propagation model are presented in Paper I. The particle
ﬂuxes calculated in Paper I are used as input into a coupled
climate–chemistry atmospheric column model. This model uses
an air shower approach to estimate GCR-induced photochemical
effects and the resulting modiﬁcation of atmospheric chemistry,
as described in Section 3.1. The cosmic-ray ﬂuxes of Paper I are
also used as input for the calculation of the particle ﬂux to the
surface. We describe our surface particle ﬂux and radiation dose
model in Section 3.2. The results obtained with these models are
given in Section 4.

3.1. Climate-chemistry atmospheric column model

To study the response of the atmosphere to the cosmic-ray
ﬂux, we use a Coupled Climate-Chemistry Atmospheric Column
Model. The details of this model are decribed elsewhere (Rauer
et al., 2011; Grenfell et al., 2012, 2013, and references therein).
Since Grenfell et al. (2007a) we include a new ofﬂine binning
routine for the input stellar spectra and a variable vertical at-
mospheric height (see Rauer et al., 2011). The code has two
main modules, namely, a radiative-convective climate module
(Section 3.1.1) and a chemistry module (Section 3.1.2). The pho-
tochemical response induced by cosmic rays is modeled accord-
ing to Grenfell et al. (2007a), including some model updates de-
scribed in Tabataba-Vakili et al. (2016) (Section 3.1.3). Finally,
the output of the atmospheric model is fed into a theoretical
spectral model (Section 3.1.4).

The modiﬁcation of atmospheric chemistry by galactic cos-
mic rays for our conﬁgurations are described in Sections 4.1, 4.2
and 4.3.

3.1.1. Climate module
The Climate Module is a global-average, stationary, hydrostatic
atmospheric column model ranging from the surface up to al-
titudes with a pressure of 6.6· 10−5 bar (for the modern Earth
this corresponds to a height of ∼70 km). Starting values of com-
position, pressure, and temperature are based on modern Earth.
The radiative transfer is based on the work of Toon et al. (1989)
for the shortwave region, and on the RRTM (Rapid Radiative
Transfer Module, Mlawer et al., 1997) for thermal radiation.
This uses 16 spectral bands by applying the correlated k-method
for major absorbers. Its validity range (see Mlawer et al., 1997)
for a given height corresponds to Earth’s modern mean temper-
ature ±30K for pressures between 10−5 and 1.05 bar and for
a CO2 abundance from modern up to 100 times modern. The
shortwave radiation scheme features 38 spectral intervals for the
main absorbers, including Rayleigh scattering for N2, O2, and
CO2 with cross-sections based on Vardavas and Carver (1984).
The climate scheme uses a constant, geometrical-mean, solar-
zenith angle of 60◦. In the troposphere, lapse rates are derived as-
suming moist adiabatic convection and using the Schwarzschild
criterion. Tropospheric humidity comes from Earth observations
(Manabe and Wetherald, 1967).

For the reference case of the Sun, we employed a high reso-
lution solar spectrum based on Gueymard (2004) binned to the
wavelength intervals employed in the photochemistry and cli-
mate schemes of the column model.

For the standard M dwarf scenario (the “chromospherically
active” case of Section 4.3), we assume a stellar spectrum iden-

tical to that of AD Leonis (an M4.5 dwarf star). The spectrum
is derived from observations of the IUE satellite and photom-
etry in the visible (Pettersen and Hawley, 1989), using obser-
vations in the near IR (Leggett et al., 1996) and based on a
nextGen stellar model spectrum for wavelengths beyond 2.4 mi-
crons (Hauschildt et al., 1999).

We also study scenarios with stellar UV ﬂares (“long ﬂare”
and “short ﬂare” scenarios). In those cases, the stellar UV spec-
trum was taken from Segura et al. (2010, Fig. 3, bold blue
line, scaled for distance). These cases are described in detail in
Section 4.3.

Clouds are not included directly, although they are consid-
ered in a straightforward manner by adjusting surface albedo to
achieve a mean surface temperature of the modern Earth (288
K).

After convergence, the climate module outputs the temper-
ature, water abundance and pressure. These variables are inter-
polated from the climate grid (52 levels) onto the chemistry grid
(64 levels) (both grids extend from the surface up to about the
mid-mesosphere) and are then used as start values for the chem-
istry module. This, in turn runs to convergence and then outputs
and interpolates the concentrations of key radiative species CH4,
H2O, O3 and N2O to be used as start values for the next cycle
of the climate module. This process is repeated back and forth
between the climate and chemistry modules until overall conver-
gence is reached.

3.1.2. Chemistry module
The Chemistry Module has been detailed in Pavlov and
Kasting (2002). Our stationary scheme has 55 species for
more than 200 reactions with chemical kinetic data taken
from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Report (Sander
et al., 2003). Molecules are photolyzed in 108 spectral in-
tervals from 175.4-855nm with an additional nine intervals
from 133-173nm and a tenth interval
in the Lyman-alpha.
The original chemistry scheme is described in Kasting
et al. (1984a,b). Further information can also be found at:
http://vpl.astro.washington.edu/sci/AntiModels/models09.html
where the original source code is available. For the absorption
cross-sections of key species undergoing photolysis, NO is
based on Cieslik and Nicolet (1973), N2O5 on Yao et al. (1982),
NO2 on Jones and Bayes (1973), O3 was taken from Malicet
et al. (1995) and Moortgat and Kudszus (1978), and NO3 was
taken from Magnotta and Johnston (1980).

We assume a planet with an Earth-like development, i.e. N2–
O2 dominated atmosphere, a modern Earth biomass, etc. The
scheme reproduces modern Earth’s atmospheric composition
with a focus on biosignature molecules (e.g., O3, N2O) and ma-
jor greenhouse gases such as CH4. The module calculates the
converged solution of the standard 1D continuity equations using
an implicit Euler scheme. Mixing occurs via Eddy diffusion co-
efﬁcients (K) based on Earth observations (Massie and Hunten,
1981). Constant surface biogenic (e.g., CH3Cl, N2O) and source
gas (e.g., CH4, CO) emissions were employed based on the mod-
ern Earth (see Grenfell et al., 2011, for more details). H2 was re-
moved at the surface as detailed in Rauer et al. (2011). Also cal-
culated are modern-day tropospheric lightning emissions of ni-
trogen monoxide (NO), volcanic sulphur emissions of SO2 and
H2S, and a constant downward ﬂux of CO and O at the upper
boundary, which represents the photolysis products of CO2. Dry
and wet deposition is included for long-lived species via depo-
sition velocities (for dry deposition) and Henry’s law constants
(for wet deposition).

3

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

3.1.3. Cosmic-ray scheme

For the Cosmic Ray Scheme, we use an air shower approach
based on Grenfell et al. (2007a, 2012) and Tabataba-Vakili et al.
(2016). The top of atmosphere (TOA) time-average proton ﬂuxes
from the magnetospheric cosmic-ray model (Paper I) are input
into the chemistry module at the upper boundary. Secondary
particles are generated, which leads to NOx production. In the
present work our scheme was updated to produce 1.25 odd ni-
trogen atoms per ion pair produced by cosmic rays, according
to Jackman et al. (1980), based on calculations of dissociation
branching ratios from relativistic particle impact cross sections
(Porter et al., 1976). We introduced a parameterization whereby
the GCR-induced N-production was split into two channels, i.e
45% ground-state N and 55% excited-state N (see Jackman et al.,
2005, and references therein). We also introduced an energy-
dependence to the total N2 ionization cross section by elec-
tron impact (Tabataba-Vakili et al., 2016), replacing the con-
stant electron impact cross section of 1.75 · 10−16 cm2 previ-
ously used with the energy-dependent cross section of Itikawa
(2006). Additionally, the input parameters for the Gaisser-Hillas
formula were extended up to 524 GeV to be consistent with the
cosmic-ray calculation. Finally, in the Gaisser-Hillas scheme the
parametrization was changed. The parameter of the proton at-
tenuation length (80 g/cm2) was replaced with a depth of ﬁrst
interaction of 5 g/cm2 according to Alvarez-Mu˜niz et al. (2002),
which led to a closer match with observations. For more de-
tails of the above updates and their effects see Tabataba-Vakili
et al. (2016). Note that the cosmic-ray scheme in the current
work includes production of only nitrogen oxides in the pho-
tochemistry (whereas in a newly-developed version as described
by Tabataba-Vakili et al. (2016) the cosmic rays lead to the pro-
duction of both nitrogen oxides and hydrogen oxides).

3.1.4. Theoretical spectral model

To calculate the spectral appearance of our model atmospheres,
we use the SQuIRRL code (Schwarzschild Quadrature InfraRed
Radiation Line-by-line, Schreier and Schimpf, 2001). This code
was designed to model radiative transfer with a high resolution
in the IR region for a spherically symmetric atmosphere (tak-
ing arbitrary observation geometry, instrumental ﬁeld of view,
and spectral response function into account). The scheme as-
sumes local thermodynamic equilibrium; for each layer, a Planck
function is used to determine the emission. Cloud and haze free
conditions without scattering are assumed. Absorption coefﬁ-
cients are calculated using molecular line parameters from the
HITRAN 2008 database (Rothman et al., 2009), and emission
spectra are calculated assuming a pencil beam at a viewing angle
of 38◦ as used, for example, in Segura et al. (2003). SQuIRRL
has been validated e.g. by Melsheimer et al. (2005).

3.2. Surface particle ﬂux and radiation dose calculation

If particles from a cosmic-ray shower reach the planetary sur-
face, biological systems on the planetary surface can be strongly
inﬂuenced and even damaged by this secondary radiation. In or-
der to assess the expected biological damage, we simulate the
air shower and its passage through the atmosphere. In the case
of Earth, muons contribute 75% of the equivalent dose rate at
the surface (O’Brien et al., 1996), so that our focus lies on these
particles, but the contribution of neutrons and electrons are in-
cluded, too.

4

Cosmic ray propagation in the atmosphere is a challenging
problem, beyond the scope of analytical tools because one has
to compute a variety of hadronic and electromagnetic interac-
tions occurring in the atmosphere. Therefore, as a complement
to the cosmic-ray air shower model which we use for secondary
electrons (see Section 3.1.3), we also use a robust Monte Carlo
package, CORSIKA v.6990 (Heck et al., 1998, 2012), which is
widely used to simulate air showers for major particle detection
experiments. The code makes use of a number of packages to
model high and low energy hadronic interaction processes and
all electromagnetic interactions of charged particles. We take
the input cosmic-ray spectrum calculated for different magnetic
ﬁeld cases (the output of Paper I) and model particle propaga-
tion with 20 million primary particles for each case. Using such
a large ensemble of particles is necessary to reduce the numerical
error as much as possible. Hadronic interactions up to 80 GeV
were modeled using the GHEISHA model and above 80 GeV
using the SIBYLL 2.1 high-energy hadronic interaction model.
None of the “thinning” options were used so that no particle in-
formation was lost. The ﬁnal output gives the momentum and
types of particles hitting the ground for 20 million primaries.
Primaries are incident at the top of the atmosphere from random
angles with energies falling randomly according to the energy
spectrum. The electromagnetic interactions enhance the atmo-
spheric ionization rate and change the atmospheric chemistry
(Atri et al., 2010). For energies of the primary particles above
8 GeV, hadronic interactions produce particles (such as muons
and neutrons), some of which reach the ground and contribute to
the radiation dose (Atri et al., 2011, 2013).

The surface radiation calculation thus is similar to the cal-
culations of Atri et al. (2013). However, we extend the primary
particle energy range and increase the range of planetary mag-
netic ﬁelds. We use an Earth-like atmospheric composition, but
compare two different values of atmospheric depth: 1036 g/cm2
(equivalent to a surface pressure of 1033hPa), and 100 g/cm2
(equivalent to a surface pressure of 97.8 hPa). The resulting sur-
face radiation equivalent dose rate is described in Section 4.4.

4. Implications

The interaction of GCR particles with a planet and its atmo-
sphere can lead to a host of interesting effects, several of which
have been suggested to be potentially relevant for habitability.
The excellent review by Dartnell (2011) mentions effects as di-
verse as: The modiﬁcation of the atmospheric chemistry (which
we discuss below), the excitation and ionization of atomic and
molecular species, the creation of an ionosphere, ions driving
atmospheric chemistry and potentially weather and climate dy-
namics, the possible inﬂuence on atmospheric lightning, the pro-
duction of organic molecules within the atmosphere, the destruc-
tion of stratospheric ozone (see below), the possible steriliza-
tion of the planetary surface (see below), and the degradation of
biosignatures (see below).

In the present work, we focus on the following effects: Based
on the atmospheric model of Section 3.1, we look at the modiﬁ-
cation of the atmospheric chemistry (Section 4.1), verify the sta-
bility of biosignature molecules against destruction by cosmic
rays (Section 4.2), and analyze the enhanced UV ﬂux resulting
from a weakened ozone layer (Section 4.3). Finally, with the sur-
face radiation calculation of Section 3.2, we study the biological
radiation dose at the planetary surface (Section 4.4).

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

4.1. Modiﬁcation of atmospheric chemistry
After having traversed the planetary magnetosphere, the galactic
cosmic-ray protons reach the planetary atmosphere. On the way
through the atmosphere, they interact with neutral gas particles,
and create secondary electrons via impact ionization:

p+ + X → p+ + X+ + e−.

(1)

These free electrons break N2 molecules, which leads to the

formation of NOx:

N2 + e− → 2N + e−,
N + O2 → NO + O.

(2)
(3)

Depending on local conditions and the dominating ozone
production mechanism, these NO molecules can either destroy
ozone (if ozone was created by the Chapman mechanism), or
may create ozone (if ozone is formed via a smog mechanism).
While both mechanisms are included in our model, ozone pro-
duction by a Chapman mechanism dominates in the case of a
planet orbiting a chromospherically active M-dwarf star, espe-
cially at altitudes above 20 km (Grenfell et al., 2013), so that in
our case NO mostly destroys stratospheric ozone by catalytic cy-
cles. Their results suggest that for planets orbiting chromospher-
ically active M-dwarf stars, this process is dominant over most
other pathways of ozone destruction, which are also included in
our model (or ozone loss via CO oxidation, see Grenfell et al.,
2013). The case of catalytic HOx created by cosmic rays is inves-
tigated in more detail elsewhere (Tabataba-Vakili et al., 2016).
Thus, we have (Crutzen, 1970):

NO + O3 → NO2 + O2
NO2 + O → NO + O2

net: O + O3 → 2O2.

(4)
(5)

(6)

The O atom in Eq. 5 is created e.g. by photolysis of O2 by pho-
tons in the Herzberg region of ∼180 nm.

Equation (6) describes the net reaction of the catalytic cycle:
Ozone molecules are transformed into molecular oxygen. NOx
is regenerated, so that a single molecule can contribute to the
destruction of a large number of ozone molecules.

In order to quantify the effects described by equations (1)
to (6) for extrasolar planets around M-dwarf stars, we use the
coupled climate-chemistry model described in Section 3.1. In
the following, we present the results obtained with this model,
probing planets with magnetic moments in the range 0.0M⊕ ≤
M ≤ 10.0M⊕.
Figure 2 shows how the inﬂux of galactic cosmic rays into
the planetary atmosphere changes the atmospheric composi-
tional proﬁle. The left panel of the ﬁgure shows the altitude-
dependent relative change in the NOx volume mixing ratio. In
the case of a weak magnetic ﬁeld, the increased inﬂux of galac-
tic cosmic rays enhanced the NOx by up to a factor 3.5. This en-
hancement peaks in the lower stratosphere, where the air shower
interaction is strong (e.g. Tabataba-Vakili et al., 2016). The right
panel of Figure 2 shows that the increased NOx catalytically de-
stroys up to 20% of stratospheric O3. In the troposphere, how-
ever, O3 abundances increase by up to 6% because NOx stimu-
lates the smog mechanism.

Figure 3 shows the effect of GCRs on CH4 and H2O.
Both chemical species decrease in concentration with decreas-
ing magnetospheric protection (i.e. increasing GCR ﬂux). The
left panel shows that the CH4 abundance decreases as shielding

decreases. This is explained by the fact that the increased amount
of cosmic-ray particles leads to a higher NOx abundance, which
in turn leads to more OH:

NO + HO2 → NO2 + OH.

(7)

The increased OH abundance leads to a more efﬁcent de-

struction of CH4:

CH4 + OH → CH3 + H2O.

(8)

Thus, less shielding (i.e. more cosmic rays) leads to less CH4.
A detailed analysis of the runs in the current paper suggests that
OH is the dominant in-situ sink: Other sinks e.g. due to reaction
with excited oxygen atoms or with atomic chlorine are weaker
and have CH4 removal rates which are lower by at least two
orders of magnitude. When we increase the planetary magnetic
moment from 0 to 10 times the Earth’s value, the atmospheric
CH4 increased modestly by 7%.

The right panel of Figure 3 shows the effect of galactic cos-
mic rays on the H2O abundance, which decreases as the mag-
netic shielding decreases (i.e. cosmic rays increase). This is a
direct effect of the decrease in CH4, see Eq. (8).

Figure 4 shows how the inﬂux of galactic cosmic rays
changes the total atmospheric column density for NOx and O3.
One can see that under the inﬂuence of galactic cosmic rays, the
NOx column varies by up to 15%, while the O3 column varies
by up to 13%.

If one compares the 0.15 M⊕ case of the present study with
the equivalent (run 3) of our previous work using an earlier
model version (Grenfell et al., 2007a), one ﬁnds that the re-
sults are in good agreement, despite the widened proton energy
range and the numerous updates to the routines of the climate-
chemistry atmospheric model (see Section 3.1 for details). For
example, run 3 of Grenfell et al. (2007a) found a 10% ozone de-
crease at 30 km altitude, and an ozone column value decreasing
by 16%, compared to the case without GCR (their run 2). In our
current model (0.15 M⊕ case), we have a 10% ozone decrease
at 30 km altitude and an ozone column value decreasing by 10%
compared to a case without cosmic rays.

Similarly, for their run 4 (corresponding to the 0.0 M⊕ case
here), Grenfell et al. (2007a) found a 12-13% ozone decrease at
30 km altitude, and an ozone column value decreasing by 19%
when compared to the case without GCR (their run 2). In our
current model (0.0 M⊕ case), we have a 12% ozone decrease at
30 km altitude, and an ozone column value decreasing by 13%.
This similarity arises e.g. from constraints in the maximum NO
production rate by measurement data for the Earth reference case
(Tabataba-Vakili et al., 2016).

Absolute values of ozone columns for the AD Leonis sce-
narios are lower in the present work than in earlier modeling
versions (e.g. Grenfell et al., 2007a). Note that in the present
work we place the planet at the distance from the star where the
net incoming energy equals one solar constant (instead of a pre-
vious approach where the surface albedo was adjusted in order
to reach a surface temperature of 288.0 K). Other recent model
updates are described in Rauer et al. (2011).

In the present work there is a clear smog signal (e.g. Figure
2, right panel) leading to an increase of tropospheric O3 when
NOx increases. This effect was not so evident in earlier studies
(e.g. Grenfell et al., 2007a). On Earth, smog ozone production
has different regimes where it can be sensitive to a) changes in
organic species (e.g., CH4, CO etc.) or b) to changes in NOx.
In the present work the absolute CH4 is higher than in Grenfell
et al. (2007a) (the overall CH4 response is chemically complex,

5

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

related to changes in OH, see Grenfell et al. (2012) for some dis-
cussion). Higher CH4 is consistent with a saturation of the smog
mechanism with respect to organic species, hence a more signif-
icant role of smog O3 to changes in NOx - more work however
is required to investigate this further.

Similarly to Grenfell et al. (2007a), we reach the conclu-
sion that atmospheric biosignature molecules are not strongly
inﬂuenced by GCRs for Earth-like planets in the habitable zone
around M-dwarf stars. The case is, however, different for solar
energetic particles, which can strongly modify the abundance of
ozone in the planetary atmosphere (Segura et al., 2010; Grenfell
et al., 2012). Using the updated model as above, this case is re-
evaluated in Tabataba-Vakili et al. (2016).

4.2. Spectral signature of biosignature molecules
A particularly useful method to study exoplanets is the anal-
ysis of their atmospheric composition via emission or trans-
mission spectroscopy. In the case of Earth-mass exoplanets or
super-Earths, a central goal involves the search for molecules
which could indicate the presence of life and which cannot be
explained by inorganic chemistry alone, so-called “biosignature
molecules” (sometimes also called “biomarkers”). Several tele-
scopes that are currently planned or under construction (e.g.,
E-ELT, JWST) could possibly detect spectral biosignatures on
potentially rocky planets around nearby stars, although this re-
mains very challenging.

Clearly, care has to be taken when selecting and interpret-
ing biosignature molecules. Proposed biosignature molecules in-
clude oxygen (when produced in large amounts by photosynthe-
sis), ozone (mainly produced from oxygen) and nitrous oxide
(produced almost exclusively from bacteria).

It is important to understand all effects which can mod-
ify the abundances of these molecules. For example, Grenfell
et al. (2007b) look at the response of biosignature chemistry
(e.g. ozone) on varying planetary and stellar parameters (orbital
distance and stellar type: F, G, and K). Rauer et al. (2011) and
Grenfell et al. (2013) study the effect of stellar spectral type
(from M0 to M7, plus the case of the active M-dwarf star AD
Leonis, which corresponds to the star used in the present study)
and of planetary mass in the Earth to super-Earth range, whereas
Grenfell et al. (2014) study the effect of varying stellar UV radi-
ation and surface biomass emissions.

One has to be sure to rule out cases where inorganic chem-
istry can mimic the presence of life (“false positives”). Potential
abiotic ozone production on Venus- and Mars-like planets has
been discussed by Schindler and Kasting (2000, and references
therein). While this is based on photolysis of e.g., CO2 and H2O
and is thus limited in extent, a sustainable production of abiotic
O3 which could build up to a detectable level has been suggested
by Domagal-Goldman and Meadows (2010) for a planet within
the habitable zone of AD Leonis with a speciﬁc atmospheric
composition. Indeed, other studies conﬁrm that abiotic buildup
of ozone is possible (e.g., Hu et al., 2012; Tian et al., 2014); how-
ever, detectable levels are unlikely if liquid water is abundant, as
e.g. rainout of oxidized species would keep atmospheric O2 and
O3 low (Segura et al., 2007), unless the CO2 concentration is
high and both H2 and CH4 emissions are low (Hu et al., 2012).
False-positive detection of molecules such as CH4 and O3 is dis-
cussed by von Paris et al. (2011). Seager et al. (2013) present
a biosignature gas classiﬁcation. Since abiotic processes cannot
be ruled out for individual molecules (e.g. for O3), searches for
biosignature molecules should search for multiple biosignature
species simultaneously. It has been suggested that the simulta-

6

neous presence of O2 and CH4 can be used as an indication for
life (Sagan et al., 1993, and references therein). Similarly, Selsis
et al. (2002) suggest a so-called “triple signature”, where the
combined detection of O3, CO2 and H2O would indicate bio-
logical activity. Domagal-Goldman and Meadows (2010) sug-
gest to simultaneously search for the signature of O2, CH4, and
C2H6. Of course, care has to be taken to avoid combinations of
biosignature molecules which can be generated abiotically to-
gether (see e.g. Tian et al., 2014). The detectability of biosigna-
ture molecules is discussed, e.g. by von Paris et al. (2011) and
Hedelt et al. (2013). In particular, the simulation of the instru-
mental response to simulated spectra for currently planned or
proposed exoplanet characterization missions has shown that the
amount of information the retrieval process can provide on the
atmospheric composition may not be sufﬁcient (von Paris et al.,
2013).

Similar to “false positives”, which can lead to erroneous in-
terpretation of observational data, one also has to deal with the
problem of “false negatives” for life-bearing planets. The ab-
sence of ozone does not necessarily mean that life is absent.
Oxygen or ozone may be quickly consumed by chemical reac-
tions, preventing it from reaching detectable levels (Schindler
and Kasting, 2000; Selsis et al., 2002). Also, non-detection can
result from masking by a wide CO2 absorption (Selsis et al.,
2002; von Paris et al., 2011). Here, we look into an abiotic pro-
cess (namely GCRs) which can destroy the signature of biosig-
nature molecules. Similarly to potential false-positives, these ef-
fects have to be taken into account in order to correctly interpret
observational data.

As has been shown in Section 4.1 (Figure 4), the ozone col-
umn can be modiﬁed by up to 13% by the action of GCRs in the
case of weak magnetic ﬁelds. We ﬁnd similar values for other
biosignature molecules. In the following, we explore the ques-
tion: Could this modify the observed spectrum of a planet, either
in emission or in transmission?
Figure 5 explores the inﬂuence of GCRs on the molecular
signature in the planetary spectrum for wavelengths between 2 ≤
λ ≤ 20µm using the SQuIRRL code (cf. Section 3.1.4). Figure
5(a) shows the planetary emission spectrum, whereas Figure
5(b) shows the relative transmission coefﬁcient (see Rauer et al.,
2011, for details on the spectral methods). In both ﬁgures, the
black line corresponds to the reference spectrum, i.e. the case
of a planet orbiting in the habitable zone of an M dwarf star
with no GCRs (zero cosmic-ray case), whereas the red line cor-
responds to the M dwarf scenario with GCR and M = 0.0M⊕
(i.e. maximum galactic cosmic-ray case). Note that the red line
mostly lies over the black line. Both ﬁgures indicate that spec-
tral observations would show no detectable difference between
the cases with and without GCRs. The same is true for obser-
vations at higher spectral resolution (e.g. for a total number of
spectral bins R=10 000, not shown).

We thus reach the conclusion that the inﬂuence of GCRs on
atmospheric biosignature molecules for Earth-like planets in the
habitable zone of M-dwarf stars is too weak to be detectable
in the planetary spectra. The case of solar energetic particles is
discussed in Tabataba-Vakili et al. (2016).

4.3. Surface UV ﬂux

Besides changes in the planetary spectrum, a direct consequence
of the loss of stratospheric ozone is an increase in the surface UV
radiation, especially in the UV-B range. We would like to know
whether this change is important enough to potentially have an

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

Fig. 2. Altitude-dependent change of the volume mixing ratio of NOx (i.e. NO + NO2) (left) and O3 (right) for exoplanets with a
magnetic moment of M = 0.0,0.05,0.1,0.15,0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0,1.5,2.0,2.5,3.0,6.0 and 10.0M⊕, relative to a case without cosmic
rays.

Fig. 3. As Fig. 2 but for CH4 (left) and H2O (right).

impact on life (since most surface life relies on a protective O3-
layer).

The atmosphere-penetrating UV radiation is frequently di-

vided into three different ranges:
– UV-A, (3150 to 4000 ˚A according to the deﬁnition of the
“Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage”, CIE), which
has the smallest biological signiﬁcance,

– UV-B (2800 to 3150 ˚A according to the CIE deﬁnition),

which is biologically damaging,

– and UV-C (1754 to 2800 ˚A in this study), which is strongly
damaging, but of which very little reaches the ground for an
Earth-like atmosphere.

The biological radiation damage created by UV-A radiation is
5 orders of magnitude weaker than the damage caused by UV-

C radiation (Horneck, 1995; Cockell, 1999; Cuntz et al., 2010).
Even so, UV-A still produces signiﬁcant mutagenic and carcino-
genic effects (e.g., de Gruijl, 2000; Scalo et al., 2007). Due to
very efﬁcient atmospheric shielding, the surface ﬂux of UV-C is
usually many orders of magnitude smaller than that of UV-A or
UV-B, even during stellar ﬂares (Segura et al., 2010). For this
reason, most work (e.g. Grenfell et al., 2012) concentrates on
UV-B radiation (280-315 nm). In this work, however, we pro-
ceed slightly differently. Similarly to Segura et al. (2010), we
study the full UV spectrum from 1754− 3150 ˚A, and present in-
tegrated results for the two relevant bands UV-A and UV-B. The
surface UV-C ﬂuxes turn out to be negligible due to atmospheric
shielding.

7

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

Fig. 4. Column density of NOx (i.e. NO + NO2, left panel) and O3 (right panel) as a function of exoplanetary magnetic moment.
One Dobson Unit (DU) is equivalent to a column density of 2.69 1016 molecules cm−2.

(a) Planetary emission contrast spectrum.

(b) Relative transmission spectrum.

Fig. 5. Emission contrast spectrum (left) and relative transmission spectrum (right) with and without GCRs for an Earth-like planet
orbiting in the habitable zone of the M-dwarf star AD Leonis. Black line (mostly hidden under the red line): no GCRs. Red line:
maximum GCRs (i.e. no planetary magnetospheric protection). The spectra were calculated for R=1000 (total number of spectral
bins).

One should note that the ways in which UV radiation can be
harmful for living cells are complex and varied (e.g., de Gruijl,
2000; Scalo et al., 2007, and references therein). In addition,
some species have found ways to protect themselves against
harmful radiation, either through repair mechanisms (Scalo
et al., 2007), protective layers, or through strategies which al-
low to avoid strong radiation altogether (e.g. Section 7 of Heath
et al., 1999; Scalo et al., 2007). The inﬂuence of a highly ﬂuctu-
ating environment on life is discussed by Scalo et al. (2007, and
references therein).

The UV ﬂux of different M-dwarf stars can differ consider-
ably, and is highly variable in time (France et al., 2013). Grenfell
et al. (2014) investigate the effect of different stellar UV ﬂuxes
on atmospheric biosignatures. When analyzing the ﬂux of the
UV radiation of an M-dwarf star to the planetary surface, we
have to distinguish between a number of different cases: The
quiescent stellar UV ﬂux of a non-active star, the UV ﬂux of
a chromospherically active star (such as AD Leo or GJ 643C),
and the UV ﬂux during a stellar UV ﬂare. For the latter case, we
differentiate between “long” and “short” ﬂares, depending on the

8

ﬂare duration relative to the atmospheric response timescale (see
below). Thus, the relevant cases are:

E) We compare to the case of Earth in the habitable zone of the

Sun (i.e. at a distance of 1 AU).

Q) The quiescent emission of (model) non-active stars is char-
acterized by UV ﬂuxes many orders of magnitude smaller
than for the Sun over the whole UV range (Segura et al.,
2005). Recent studies indicate that this case may be less rep-
resentative than previously thought (France et al., 2013). No
noticeable effect is expected and thus this case is not further
discussed in this work.

CA) Chromospherically active stars have additional ﬂux in the
range 100-300 nm, generated by chromospheric and coronal
activity. Although their absolute UV ﬂux is inferior to that of
the Sun (e.g. Buccino et al., 2007, Fig. 1), their normalized
UV ﬂux (i.e. at a distance where the surface temperature or
total ﬂux equals that on present Earth) however may exceed
the solar value (e.g. by a factor up to 10 in UV-C, Segura
et al., 2005). Recent studies indicate that AD Leo may be

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

more active than previously thought (France et al., 2013).
For a planet in the habitable zone of a chromospherically
active M-dwarf star, we use the top of atmosphere (TOA)
UV spectrum of AD Leonis, as described in Section 3.1.

LF) During a stellar ﬂare, the UV ﬂux typically increases by one
order of magnitude (France et al., 2013), and by at least two
orders of magnitude in more extreme cases (Scalo et al.,
2007; Segura et al., 2010, who looked at different stages of
the 1985 ﬂare of AD Leo), with a timescale of 102-103 sec-
onds. For a planet in the habitable zone of a ﬂaring M-dwarf
star, we use the TOA UV spectrum of Segura et al. (2010,
their Fig. 3, bold blue line, scaled for distance), i.e. the max-
imum ﬂux at the ﬂare peak. The TOA ﬂux is approximately
solar for UV-A and 2.5 times solar for UV-B (see Table 1).
For UV-C, the TOA ﬂux is ∼ 10 times solar. The timescale of
the ﬂare has to be compared to the timescale over which the
atmosphere responds. As we are using a stationary model,
we can only probe the extreme cases of very long (quasi-
continuous) stellar UV ﬂares, where the time between ﬂares
is so short that the atmosphere is constantly under ﬂaring
conditions, and of very short (isolated) ﬂares, where the at-
mosphere does not have the time to react to the ﬂare. In the
case of a long ﬂare, the ﬂare timescale is longer than the
typical reaction time of the planetary atmosphere and the at-
mosphere adjusts to the modiﬁed conditions. In this case, we
calculate the surface UV ﬂux from the modiﬁed TOA ﬂux
using the model of Section 3.1. This case also applies when
the planet is subject to a quasi-continuous succession of UV
ﬂares, which might well be the case for planets around ac-
tive M-dwarf stars (Khodachenko et al., 2007; Grenfell et al.,
2012).

SF) If, on the other hand, the timescale of the UV ﬂare (e.g. its
duration) is short compared to the atmospheric reaction time,
the atmosphere has not yet adjusted to the increased UV
ﬂux. In this short ﬂare case, the atmosphere, and thus its
transmission ratio R(λ) = Isurface(λ)/ITOA(λ) are identical to
the pre-ﬂare conditions, i.e. the case CA described above.
Hereby, Isurface(λ) and ITOA(λ) denote the ﬂux at the plan-
etary surface and at the top of the atmosphere, respectively.
The top-of-atmosphere UV-ﬂux, however, is identical to the
ﬂaring case, LF. We thus use the transfer function R(λ) ob-
tained in the case CA, and multiply it with the TOA UV ﬂux
of the case LF (Segura et al., 2010, their Fig. 3, bold blue
line scaled for distance) to obtain the surface UV ﬂux. On
Earth and in our exoplanetary calculations, most atmospheric
ozone is located below 50 km where reaction timescales are
long (e.g. Allen et al., 1984), so that this scenario is appro-
priate for an isolated ﬂare (i.e. the ﬂare timescales are much
shorter than the atmospheric reaction timescales).

SCR) Stellar UV ﬂares are expected to be frequently accom-
panied by stellar cosmic-ray (SCR) particles, which are
not included in the above cases LF and SF. The inﬂuence
of such SCRs (as opposed to the GCRs discussed in the
present work) are only brieﬂy discussed below. A more de-
tailed analysis is presented separately (Tabataba-Vakili et al.,
2016).

In addition to the UV ﬂux emitted by the planetary host star,
another source can contribute to atmospheric and surface UV.
Smith et al. (2004) have suggested that stellar X-rays may be
reprocessed in the atmosphere, generating an additional contri-
bution of UV photons. They found that up to 10% of the X-ray
energy may be redistributed into the UV range by aurora-like
emission in the absence of UV-blocking agents (i.e. when the UV

transport is deﬁned by Rayleigh scattering alone). In the case of
the Earth, UV redistribution may transfer a fraction of 2· 10−3
of the incident energy to the planetary surface in the 200-320
nm range. Segura et al. (2010) estimated the X-ray energy for a
strong ﬂare on the M-dwarf star AD Leo ﬂare to be 9 W/m2, so
the energy redistributed as UV radiation at the planetary surface
should be < 0.018 W/m2. This is negligible compared to the UV
ﬂux of the ﬂare itself (cf. Table 1).

For the above cases E), CA) and LF), we are interested in the
transmission of UV radiation through the atmosphere. For each
case, we investigate the full range from M = 0 (i.e. no magneto-
spheric shielding, where the atmospheric ozone is most strongly
depleted by galactic cosmic rays) up to 10M⊕ (i.e. strong mag-
netospheric shielding), plus the case without GCRs (which, for
our purposes, corresponds to a planet with an inﬁnite magnetic
moment, and thus a planet with maximum stratospheric ozone
shield).

We proceed as follows:

TOA and IUV-B

– We take the wavelength-resolved stellar UV ﬂux and calcu-
late the ﬂux incident at the top of atmosphere (TOA) of the
M-dwarf star planet corresponding to the planetary orbital
distance. From this we calculate the wavelength-integrated
TOA UV ﬂuxes IUV-A
TOA (Columns 3 and 6 of Table
1).
– With this UV ﬂux, the numerical model described in Section
3.1, and using the magnetic-ﬁeld dependent TOA ﬂuxes of
GCR particles from Paper I, we calculate the wavelength-
resolved ﬂux of UV at the planetary surface. From this we
calculate the wavelength-integrated surface UV ﬂuxes IUV-A
surface
and IUV-B
surface (Columns 4 and 7 of Table 1). The effects that are
considered here are absorption (by O3 and other species) and
Rayleigh scattering by atmospheric molecules.

– We calculate the ratio of UV penetrating through the plan-
etary atmosphere, averaged over the corresponding UV
band, e.g. RUV-A = IUV-A
TOA , and similarly for RUV-B
(Columns 5 and 8 of Table 1). R thus characterizes the av-
erage UV shielding by the atmosphere in a particular wave-
length band. Note that the value of R depends on both the
TOA GCR ﬂux and the TOA UV ﬂux (the atmosphere be-
haves as a non-linear system).

surface/IUV-A

– We multiply the wavelength-resolved UV surface spectra
with the DNA action spectrum of Cuntz et al. (2010, Figure
1), which is based on previously published data (Horneck,
1995; Cockell, 1999), to calculate the effective biological
UV ﬂux W at the planetary surface (Column 9 of Table 1,
and Figures 6 and 7). In this, the DNA action spectrum is
normalized to 1 at a wavelength of 300 nm (i.e. at 300 nm,
a ﬂux of 1 W/m2 contributes 1 W/m2 to W ). We also com-
pare the relative contribution of UV-A, UV-B and UV-C to
the effective biological UV ﬂux W .

Our main results are described in the following (see also

Table 1).

: In the case of the Earth, GCRs leave both the
Case E (Earth)
UV transmission coefﬁcients and the UV surface ﬂuxes virtu-
ally unchanged. As a consequence, the biologically weighted
UV surface ﬂux W is barely affected by the presence of GCRs
(Table 1, Column 9).

The surface UV-B results, i.e. the surface ﬂux (Table 1,
Column 7) and the transmission coefﬁcient (Table 1, Column
8) show a good accordance with Grenfell et al. (2012, Table 2,
line 1), where RUV-B = 0.13 for the case with GCRs, and with

9

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

Fig. 6. Biologically weighted surface UV ﬂux W as a function
of magnetospheric shielding for a chromospherically active star
(case CA).

Fig. 7. Biologically weighted surface UV ﬂux W as a function
of magnetospheric shielding. Dashed line: Long ﬂare (case LF).
Dash-dotted line: Short ﬂare (case SF). Circle: Earth (case E).

Grenfell et al. (2013), where RUV-B = 0.16 for the case without
GCRs. These values are also compatible with Earth observations
(Grenfell et al., 2012, Table 2, line 4).

For the biologically weighted ﬂux, we ﬁnd W = 0.126 W/m2,
which is dominated by the contribution of UV-B (94%), with
a small contribution from UV-A (6%). The inﬂuence of UV-C
on W is negligible. Cockell (1999) obtain a lower value for W ,
which is possibly due to their stronger ozone layer.

: In the case of a planet
Case CA (chromospherically active star)
in the habitable zone of a chromospherically active M-dwarf
star, the transmission ratio for UV-A is RUV-A = 0.74 (Table 1,
Column 5), independent of magnetic shielding, and similar to
the case of the Earth.

As shown in Table 1, the cosmic-ray induced weakening
of the ozone layer described in Section 4.1 has little inﬂuence
on the atmospheric UV-B transmission ratio RUV-B (Column 8),
which increases from 0.10 to 0.11 with decreasing magnetic
shielding (i.e. increasing GCR effect). Between strong and zero
magnetic shielding, the UV-B surface ﬂux increases by 14 %
(for a decrease of the ozone Column by 13%, see Section 4.1).
This is consistent with the near-linear relationship between at-
mospheric ozone column and surface UV-B ﬂux observed on
Earth (e.g. Kerr and McElroy, 1993). Due to the low intensity of
UV-B emitted by the M-dwarf star, the resulting UV-B surface
ﬂux is very small (two order of magnitude less than on present-
day Earth, see Column 7).

The surface UV-C ﬂux (not shown) is negligibly small, even
when the high biological response factor to UV-C is taken into
account.

Figure 6 shows how the biologically weighted UV surface
ﬂux W changes as a function of magnetic shielding; between
minimum and maximum magnetic shielding, W changes by
∼ 40%. It is dominated by the contribution of UV-B (≥ 95%),
with a small contribution from UV-A (3-5%). The inﬂuence of
UV-C on W is negligible. A detailed analysis shows that for our
parameters the UV-B ﬂux at 300 nm has the strongest contribu-
tion to W . W is considerably lower than on Earth (case E; see
Column 9 of Table 1). Our results are in good agreement with
Grenfell et al. (2013), who ﬁnd RUV-B = 0.11 for AD Leo (case
without cosmic rays).

: As shown in Table 1, the results
Case LF (long stellar UV ﬂare)
are different in the case of an exoplanet either exposed to a long
UV ﬂare or to a quasi-continuous succession of UV ﬂares (case
LF). The UV-A transmission ratio RUV-A is similar to that of the
case CA, but the higher TOA ﬂux leads to an increased surface
UV-A intensity.

For UV-B, the transmission ratio is reduced compared to the
case CA. However, this is compensated by the increased TOA
ﬂux, so that the surface ﬂux is higher than for the chromospher-
ically active case (about two orders of magnitude) and exceeds
the level of case E.

Again, the surface UV-C ﬂux (not shown) is negligibly small,
even when the high biological response factor to UV-C is taken
into account.

Compared to the case CA, the biologically weighted UV sur-
face ﬂux W (which is mostly determined by shortwave UV-B) is
increased by up to two orders of magnitude in the case LF. It is
comparable to the value for Earth (case E, circle in Figure 7. See
also Column 9 of Table 1). W is dominated by the contribution
of UV-B (≥ 92%), with a small contribution from UV-A (7-8%).
The inﬂuence of UV-C on W is negligible.

Another effect of long ﬂares can be seen in Table 1 and
Figure 7: When the magnetic moment increases, i.e. when the
planet is better shielded against GCRs, the surface UV ﬂux
shows a slight increase! This is a consequence of the enhanced
stellar UV ﬂux, which leads to extra ozone production in the alti-
tude region 5-30 km, with a peak at 18 km (Figure 8). This sug-
gests an increasing smog mechanism at low altitudes, whereas
above 30 km O3 is still destroyed by catalytic NOx. Figure
8 shows that with increasing GCR ﬂux (decreasing magnetic
shielding), the smog mechanism in the lower atmosphere domi-
nates over the catalytic destruction in the upper atmosphere, so
that the column integrated ozone content increases, and the sur-
face UV ﬂux decreases (Figure 7).

: For a short stellar ﬂare (with
Case SF (short stellar UV ﬂare)
a timescale of 102-103 seconds), we do not have the inversed
response (i.e. increase of surface UV with increasing magnetic
moment) of case LF, but instead (by construction) a behavior
identical to the case CA, with higher absolute ﬂux values (cf.
Table 1). Also, by construction, the averaged UV transmission

10

CA(chromosphericallyactive)M[M⊕]weightedUVsurfaceﬂux[W/m2]1098765432100.00220.00210.0020.00190.00180.00170.00160.00150.0014SF(shortﬂare)LF(longﬂare)E(Earth)M[M⊕]weightedUVsurfaceﬂux[W/m2]1098765432100.60.50.40.30.20.10J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

Fig. 8. As Figure 2 but for the case of a long UV ﬂare (LF).

rates are similar to the case CA and the atmospheric proﬁle is
identical to that of the case CA (Figure 2).

cases.

As a result of the higher input ﬂux, the surface ﬂux of UV-A
and UV-B is at least 50 times higher than in the case CA, see
Table 1.

In the case SF, the biologically weighted UV surface ﬂux W
is higher than in the case CA by a factor 200-300. Again, W is
dominated by the contribution of UV-B (≥ 97%), with a small
contribution from UV-A (2-3%). The inﬂuence of UV-C on W is
negligible.

The modulation by the magnetic ﬁeld is comparable to the
case CA (compare Figures 6 and 7): Between M = 0 and
1.0M⊕, W decreases by 30%. For higher magnetic ﬁelds, W con-
tinues to decrease, by up to 10% (Figure 7). As indicated in Table
1 (Column 9) and Figure 7, W is a factor of 3-4 higher than on
Earth (case E) for the duration of the short ﬂare.

: UV ﬂares are frequently ac-
Case SCR (stellar cosmic rays)
companied by stellar cosmic-ray particles (Segura et al., 2010),
which would amplify the ozone destruction. In that case, the
strong removal of stratospheric ozone (Grenfell et al., 2012) can
reduce the UV shielding to ∼ 50%, and lead to considerably
higher UV surface ﬂuxes, surpassing those on the terrestrial sur-
face by an order of magnitude. Using the current model, this case
is re-evaluated in a separate article (Tabataba-Vakili et al., 2016).

Discussion : The comparison shows that a short ﬂare is poten-
tially more harmful than a long ﬂare, in which the atmosphere
has time to adjust to the high UV ﬂux and absorption is increased
at mid-altitudes. The effect of GCRs on planetary UV radiation
is weaker than the modiﬁcation caused by a change in the stellar
spectrum (e.g. case E to CA). Looking at the different wave-
length ranges, one notices that:

– GCRs leave the UV-A transmission coefﬁcient and ﬂux vir-

tually unchanged.

– For UV-B, GCRs modify the transmission rate and surface
ﬂux by less than 20%, and the relative change is proportional
to the change in ozone column, as expected.

– The surface ﬂux of UV-C remains negligibly small in all

– GCRs may change the biologically weighted UV surface ﬂux
W by up to 40%. In all cases, W is dominated by the contri-
bution of UV-B (≥ 90%), with a minor contribution from
UV-A (2-8 %). UV-C does not contribute signiﬁcantly to W .
– The GCR-induced variation of W (40%) is much less than
the difference due to a change in stellar emission during a
ﬂare. For example, during a short stellar ﬂare (case SF), one
ﬁnds values 3-4 times higher than on Earth (case E), or 200-
300 times the quiescent level (case CA).
– The GCR-induced UV radiation is W ≤ 0.55 W/m2 (Table 1,
Column 9). This value has to be compared to the tolerance of
biological systems. In particular, Deinoccocus radiodurans
is able to withstand high levels of UV radiation. Gasc´on et al.
(1995) estimate the D90 dose (i.e.
the dose for inactivation
of 90% of the bacterial population) of Deinoccocus radio-
durans to be ∼ 553 J/m2. For their measurements, they used
a UV lamp with a ﬂux density of 1.7 W/m2 at 256 nm; the
D90 time their case was thus of the order of 5 minutes. The
ﬂux density of their lamp corresponds to an equivalent DNA
effective irradiance of 43 W/m2 (Cockell, 1999), i.e. almost
two order of magnitude stronger than the maximum UV ﬂux
caused by GCRs, cf. Table 1. The D90 time for Deinoccocus
radiodurans on the surface of a magnetically unshielded ex-
oplanet exposed to GCRs plus stellar UV ﬂares would thus
be of the order of 7 hours. Also, bacteria are usually not fully
exposed. Cockell (1999) estimates that life on Earth may
have arisen during times when the biologically weighted UV
ﬂux was > 96 W/m2, which is higher by a factor 170 than
the maximum value for GCR-induced UV (W ≤ 0.55 W/m2,
cf. Table 1). We thus conclude that GCR-induced UV radia-
tion can be considered as non-critical.

We conclude that GCR-induced UV radiation is non-critical,
but we note that the UV environment on M-dwarf star planets is
much more variable than on Earth.

11

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

4.4. Surface biological dose rate

In this section, we analyze which fraction of cosmic-ray parti-
cles can reach the planetary surface, and evaluate the associated
biological dose rate.

Like on Earth, the surface of an exoplanet can be shielded
against galactic cosmic rays by two barriers. The ﬁrst barrier
is the planetary magnetosphere, which deﬂects particles pro-
vided their energy is low enough (Paper I). However, this does
not mean that all particles that penetrate through the magneto-
sphere reach the surface. The atmosphere acts as a second bar-
rier, and prevents low-energy particles and their products from
reaching the surface (O’Brien et al., 1996). At Earth, the mini-
mum energy a proton must have to initiate a nuclear interaction
sequence detectable at the surface is approximately 450 MeV
(Shea and Smart, 2000). Higher energy protons generate an at-
mospheric nuclear cascade or cosmic-ray shower, with high en-
ergy secondary particles such as neutrons, electrons, pions and
muons reaching the planetary surface. The low-energy compo-
nents of the cascade are absorbed in the atmosphere, leading to
an altitude with maximum particle ﬂux, the Pfotzer maximum.
In the case of the Earth, the Pfotzer maximum is located at an
altitude of 15-26 km, depending on latitude and solar activity
level (Bazilevskaya et al., 2008). Below the Pfotzer maximum,
the particle ﬂux decreases toward the surface. Depending on the
altitude of the Pfotzer maximum, the surface radiation dose can
either be lower or higher than at the top of the atmosphere. For a
planet with an Earth-like atmosphere, the absorption effect dom-
inates, and the atmosphere has to be regarded as a second barrier
which partially protects the surface against the cosmic-ray ﬂux.
If parts of the cosmic-ray shower reach the planetary surface,
one could expect that biological systems there can be strongly
inﬂuenced and even damaged by this secondary radiation. This
expectation is backed up by experimental evidence, which shows
that during Ground Level Enhancements (extreme events where
large numbers of secondary cosmic rays reach the Earth’s sur-
face) DNA lesions on the cellular level increase considerably
(Belisheva et al., 2005; Grießmeier et al., 2005; Belisheva et al.,
2006; Dartnell, 2011; Belisheva et al., 2012, and references
therein). In the case of Earth, muons contribute 75% of the
equivalent dose rate at the surface (O’Brien et al., 1996).

In Paper I, we have shown that weakly magnetized super-
Earths orbiting M-dwarf stars can be exposed to much higher
cosmic-ray ﬂuxes at the top of the atmosphere when compared
to the case of the Earth. The question naturally arises: How does
this high ﬂux at the top of the atmosphere translate into a radia-
tion dose at the planetary surface?

The details of this interaction and the resulting radiation dose
on the planetary surface depend on the planetary atmospheric
pressure and composition. Thus, the best way to address this is-
sue is to simulate numerically the interactions by following the
particles from the top of the atmosphere down to the planetary
surface. For this, we use the surface particle ﬂux and radiation
dose model as described in Section 3.2. First results have been
presented by Atri et al. (2013); for the current work, the range of
planetary magnetic moments has been extended.

Figure 9 and Table 2 show the total biological radiation dose
rate as a function of the planetary magnetic ﬁeld, measured in
mSv/yr. In Figure 9, the dash-dotted line corresponds to a planet
with an atmospheric depth of 1036 g/cm2 (B1036, i.e. the biolog-
ical radiation dose rate for an Earth-like atmosphere with a sur-
face pressure of 1033 hPa), while the dashed line corresponds to
a planet with an atmospheric depth of 100 g/cm2 (B100, the bio-
logical radiation dose rate for a planet with a surface pressure of

12

Fig. 9. Total biological dose rate (i.e. the sum of radiation dose
rates by muons, electrons, and neutrons, in mSv/yr) as a function
of magnetospheric shielding. Bold dash-dotted line: planet with
an atmospheric depth of 1036 g/cm2 (i.e. an Earth-like atmo-
sphere with a surface pressure of 1033 hPa). Bold dashed line:
planet with an atmospheric depth of 100 g/cm2 (i.e. a surface
pressure of 97.8 hPa). Vertical line (shown as a guide for the
eye): M = 1.0M⊕. Horizontal lines (shown for comparison):
Total biological dose rates for the case M = 0 (upper dashed
and upper dash-dotted horizontal line) and M = 1.0M⊕ (lower
dashed and lower dash-dotted line). Circle: Earth.

M [M⊕]

B1036 [mSv/yr]

B100 [mSv/yr]

0.0
0.1
0.15
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
2.0
3.0
6.0
10.0

0.65
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.42
0.39
0.34
0.28
0.23
0.19
0.1

553
527
510
405
257
216
172
53
15
5.7
2.3

Table 2. Total biological dose rate B (i.e. the sum of radiation
dose rates by muons, electrons, and neutrons, in mSv/yr) in the
case of modiﬁed magnetospheric shielding for a planet with an
atmospheric depth of 1036 g/cm2 (B1036) and for a planet with
an atmospheric depth of 100 g/cm2 (B100).

97.8 hPa). The vertical line denotes Earth’s magnetic moment
(M = 1.0M⊕), and the circle indicates Earth-like conditions.
The horizontal lines are shown to guide the eye. They indicate
the total biological dose rates for the cases M = 0 (upper dashed
and upper dash-dotted horizontal line) and M = 1.0M⊕ (lower
dashed and lower dash-dotted horizontal line).

In the case of a planet with an Earth-like atmosphere with a
surface pressure of 1033 hPa (dash-dotted line), magnetospheric
shielding reduces the surface biological dose rate by a factor
of approximately 2 between M = 0 and 1M⊕. Obviously, for

M=1.0M⊕M=0.0M⊕M=1.0M⊕M=0.0M⊕M[M⊕]totalbiologicalradiationdose1010.110001001010.1J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

stronger magnetic ﬁelds (M > 1M⊕), the biological dose rate
further decreases (by another factor of 3 for M = 10.0M⊕). As
the magnetic ﬁeld decreases, the ﬁlter efﬁciency of the mag-
netosphere decreases, and the number of cosmic-ray protons
reaching the top of the planetary atmosphere increases (Paper
I). However, the atmosphere remains as a second ﬁlter, and re-
moves most of the biologically relevant particles, so that the total
biological radiation dose rate of Figure 9 (i.e. the sum of the ra-
diation dose rates by muons, electrons, and neutrons) increases
only slowly with decreasing magnetic moment.

For a planet with a weaker atmosphere having a surface pres-
sure of 97.8 hPa (dashed line), magnetospheric shielding is more
important, and reduces the surface biological dose rate by a fac-
tor of approximately 3 between M = 0 and 1M⊕, and another
factor of 70 between M = 1 and 10M⊕.

As was already noted by Atri et al. (2013), atmospheric
shielding dominates over magnetospheric shielding. In Figure
9 and Table 2, this is indeed obvious: At M = 0, the Earth-
like atmosphere (bold dash-dotted curve in Figure 9) reduces the
surface biological dose rate by almost three orders of magni-
tude when compared to the weak atmosphere case (bold dashed
curve). For an Earth-like magnetic moment (M = 1M⊕), the
difference is still more than two orders of magnitude. For
strongly magnetized planets, the difference is smaller, but atmo-
spheric shielding still remains stronger than the magnetospheric
shielding.
The values of Table 2 have to be compared to the terres-
trial background radiation of 2.4 mSv yr−1 (Atri et al., 2013).
A planet with a sufﬁciently thick atmosphere (where, for exam-
ple, an Earth-like N2-O2-atmosphere with a surface pressure of
a ∼1 bar can be considered as “sufﬁciently thick”) is protected
against strong biological radiation generated by GCR regardless
of its magnetic ﬁeld. For planets with a thin atmosphere, how-
ever, magnetospheric shielding is important as it can prevent an
increase of the radiation dose to several hundred times the back-
ground level. For close-in rocky planets less massive than Earth,
atmospheric escape can play an important role, so that the plane-
tary atmosphere is likely to be less dense than on Earth. For this
reason, our result is likely to be important for potential life on
the surface of sub-Earth-mass close-in rocky exoplanets.

5. Conclusion

Magnetic ﬁelds on most super-Earths around M-dwarf stars are
likely to be weak and short-lived, or even non-existent. With this
in mind, the question of planetary magnetic shielding against
galactic cosmic rays becomes important (the case of stellar cos-
mic rays is analyzed in a separate article, Tabataba-Vakili et al.,
2016). We use the systematic study of GCR ﬂuxes presented in
Paper I, where we found that the ﬂux of galactic cosmic rays to
the planetary atmosphere can be increased by over three orders
of magnitude in the absence of a protecting magnetic ﬁeld.

With this input, we found that these energetic particles can
destroy part of the atmospheric ozone and other biosignature
molecules. However, with less than 20% difference in ozone col-
umn, this has little impact on remote detection of biosignature
molecules.

GCRs may also change the biologically weighted UV sur-
face ﬂux W by up to 40%. During a stellar ﬂare, W can increase
much more, and reach values a factor of 3-4 higher than on Earth,
or 200-300 times the quiescent level. Such values can be consid-
ered as non-critical. Also, this effect is not strongly dependent
on the GCR ﬂux, but we note that the surface UV ﬂux on M-

dwarf star planets is much more variable than what we know
from Earth.

Finally, part of the energetic charged particles reach the plan-
etary surface, where they contribute to a potentially harmful ra-
diation background and increase the effective dose rate. This in-
crease is only a factor of a few for the case of an Earth-like at-
mosphere. For planets with a thin atmosphere, however, magne-
tospheric shielding is important to protect the surface. This may
also have important implications for studies of the possibility of
life on the surface of sub-Earth-mass exoplanets close to their
host star.

Overall, the potential absence of magnetic shielding against
galactic cosmic rays has surprisingly little effect on the planet
considered. Other effects are likely to dominate, unless the
planet has a weak atmosphere and a strong magnetosphere. The
case is different for stellar cosmic rays, which are analyzed in a
companion article (Tabataba-Vakili et al., 2016).

Acknowledgements. This study was supported by the International Space
Science Institute (ISSI) and beneﬁted from the ISSI Team “Evolution of
Exoplanet Atmospheres and their Characterisation”.

References
Allen, M., Lunine, J. I., Yung, Y. L., 1984. The vertical distribution of ozone in
the mesosphere and lower thermosphere. J. Geophys. Res. 89 (D3), 4841–
4872.

Alvarez-Mu˜niz, J., Engel, R., Gaisser, T. K., Ortiz, J. A., Stanev, T., 2002. Hybrid

simulations of extensive air showers. Phys. Rev. D 66, 033011.

Atri, D., , Melott, A. L., 2011. Modeling high-energy cosmic ray induced terres-

trial muon ﬂux: A lookup table. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 80, 701–703.

Atri, D., Hariharan, B., Grießmeier, J.-M., 2013. Galactic cosmic ray–induced

radiation dose on terrestrial exoplanets. Astrobiology 13 (10), 910–919.

Atri, D., Melott, A. L., Thomas, B. C., 2010. Lookup tables to compute high en-
ergy cosmic ray induced atmospheric ionization and changes in atmospheric
chemistry. J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 5, 8.

Bazilevskaya, G. A., Usoskin, I. G., Fl¨uckiger, E. O., Harrison, R. G., Desorgher,
L., B¨utikofer, R., Krainev, M. B., Makhmutov, V. S., Stozhkov, Y. I.,
Svirzhevskaya, A. K., Svirzhevsky, N. S., Kovaltsov, G. A., 2008. Cosmic
ray induced ion production in the atmosphere. Space Sci. Rev. 137, 149–173.
Belisheva, N. K., Kuzhevskii, B. M., Vashenyuk, E. V., Zhirov, V. K., 2005.
Correlation between the fusion dynamics of cells growing in vitro and varia-
tions of neutron intensity near the Earth’s surface. Doklady Biochemistry and
Biophysics 402, 254–257.

Belisheva, N. K., Kuzhevskij, B. M., Sigaeva, E. A., Panasyuk, M. I., Zhirov,
V. K., 2006. Variations in the neutron intensity near the Earth’s surface mod-
ulate the functional state of the blood. Doklady Biochemistry and Biophysics
407, 83–87.

Belisheva, N. K., Lammer, H., Biernat, H. K., Vashenuyk, E. V., 2012. The effect
of cosmic rays on biological systems – an investigation during GLE events.
Astrophys. Space Sci. Trans. 8, 7–17.

Buccino, A. P., Lemarchand, G. A., Mauas, P. J. D., 2007. UV habitable zones

around M stars. Icarus 192, 582–587.

Cieslik, S., Nicolet, M., 1973. The aeronomic dissociation of nitric oxide. Planet.

Space Sci. 21, 925–938.

Cockell, C. S., 1999. Carbon biochemistry and the ultraviolet radiation environ-

ments of F, G, and K main sequence stars. Icarus 141, 399–407.

Crutzen, P. J., 1970. The inﬂuence of nitrogen oxides on the atmospheric ozone

content. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 96, 320–325.

Cuntz, M., Guinan, E. F., Kurucz, R. L., 2010. Biological damage due to pho-
tospheric, chromospheric and ﬂare radiation in the environments of main-
sequence stars. In: Kosovichev, A. G., Andrei, A. H., Rozelot, J.-P. (Eds.),
IAU Symp. 264: Solar and Stellar Variability: Impact on Earth and Planets.
pp. 419–426.

Dartnell, L. R., 2011. Ionizing radiation and life. Astrobiology 11 (6), 551–582.
de Gruijl, F. R., 2000. Photocarcinogenesis: UVA vs UVB. Method. Enzymol.

319, 359–366.

Domagal-Goldman, S. D., Meadows, V. S., 2010. Abiotic buildup of ozone. In:
du Foresto, V. C., Gelino, D. M., Ribas, I. (Eds.), Pathways Towards Habitable
Planets. Vol. 430 of ASP Conference Series. pp. 152–157.

Dressing, C. D., Charbonneau, D., 2013. The occurrence rate of small planets

around small stars. Astrophys. J. 767, 95.

France, K., Froning, C. S., Linsky, J. L., Roberge, A., Stocke, J. T., Tian, F.,
Bushinsky, R., D´esert, J.-M., Mauas, P., Vieytes, M., Walkowicz, L. M., 2013.

13

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

The ultraviolet radiation environment around M dwarf exoplanet host stars.
Astrophys. J. 763, 149.

Gasc´on, J., Oubi˜na, A., P´erez-Lezaun, A., Urmeneta, J., 1995. Sensitivity of se-

lected bacterial specias to UV radiation. Curr. Microbiol. 30, 177–182.

Grenfell, J., Gebauer, S., Godolt, M., Palczynski, K., Rauer, H., Stock, J., von
Paris, P., Lehmann, R., Selsis, F., 2013. Potential biosignatures in Super-Earth
atmospheres II. Photochemical responses. Astrobiology 13 (5), 415–438.

Grenfell, J. L., Gebauer, S., von Paris, P., Godolt, M., Hedelt, P., Patzer, A. B. C.,
Stracke, B., Rauer, H., 2011. Sensitivity of biomarkers to changes in chemical
emissions in the Earth’s Proterozoic atmosphere. Icarus 211, 81–88.

Grenfell, J. L., Gebauer, S., von Paris, P., M.Godolt, H.Rauer, 2014. Sensitivity
of biosignatures on Earth-like planets orbiting in the habitable zone of cool
M-dwarf stars to varying stellar UV radiation and surface biomass emissions.
Planet. Space Sci. 98, 66–76.

Grenfell, J. L., Grießmeier, J.-M., Patzer, B., Rauer, H., Segura, A., Stadelmann,
A., Stracke, B., Titz, R., von Paris, P., 2007a. Biomarker response to galac-
tic cosmic ray-induced NOx and the methane greenhouse effect in the atmo-
sphere of an Earth-like planet orbiting an M dwarf star. Astrobiology 7 (1),
208–221.

Grenfell, J. L., Grießmeier, J.-M., von Paris, P., Patzer, A. B. C., Lammer,
H., Stracke, B., Gebauer, S., Schreier, F., Rauer, H., 2012. Response of at-
mospheric biomarkers to NOx-induced photochemistry generated by stellar
cosmic rays for Earth-like planets in the habitable zone of M dwarf stars.
Astrobiology 12 (12), 1109–1122.

Grenfell, J. L., Stracke, B., von Paris, P., Patzer, B., Titz, R., Segura, A., Rauer,
H., 2007b. The response of atmospheric chemistry on earthlike planets around
F, G and K stars to small variations in orbital distance. Planet. Space Sci. 55,
661–671.

Grießmeier, J.-M., 2014. Detection methods and relevance of exoplanetary mag-
netic ﬁelds. In: Lammer, H., Khodachenko, M. (Eds.), Characterizing stellar
and exoplanetary environments. Vol. 411 of Astrophysics and Space Science
Library. Springer, Ch. 11, pp. 213–237.

Grießmeier, J.-M., Stadelmann, A., Grenfell, J. L., Lammer, H., Motschmann,
U., 2009. On the protection of extrasolar Earth-like planets around K/M stars
against galactic cosmic rays. Icarus 199, 526–535.

Grießmeier, J.-M., Stadelmann, A., Motschmann, U., Belisheva, N. K., Lammer,
H., Biernat, H. K., 2005. Cosmic ray impact on extrasolar Earth-like planets
in close-in habitable zones. Astrobiology 5 (5), 587–603.

Grießmeier, J.-M., Tabataba-Vakili, F., Stadelmann, A., Grenfell, J. L., Atri, D.,
2015. Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: I. Cosmic ray
ﬂux. Astron. Astrophys. 581, A44.

Gueymard, C. A., 2004. The sun’s total and spectral irradiance for solar energy

Hauschildt, P. H., Allard, F., Baron, E., 1999. The NextGen model atmosphere

applications and solar radiation models. Solar Energy 76, 423–453.
grid for 3000≤ Teff ≤ 10,000 K. Astrophys. J. 512, 377–385.
planets around red dwarf stars. Origins Life Evol. Biosphere 29, 405–424.

Heath, M. J., Doyle, L. R., Joshi, M. M., Haberle, R. M., 1999. Habitability of

Heck, D., Knapp, J., Capdevielle, J. N., Schatz, G., Thouw, T., 1998. CORSIKA:
A Monte Carlo code to simulate extensive air showers. Scientiﬁc report
(FZKA 6019), Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe.

Heck, D., Peirog, T., Knapp, J., 2012. CORSIKA: An air shower simulation pro-

gram. Astrophysics Source Code Library 1202.006.

Hedelt, P., von Paris, P., Godolt, M., Gebauer, S., Grenfell, J. L., Rauer, H.,
Schreier, F., Selsis, F., , Trautmann, T., 2013. Spectral features of Earth-like
planets and their detectability at different orbital distances around F, G, and
K-type stars. Astron. Astrophys. 553, A9.

Horneck, G., 1995. Quantiﬁcation of the biological effectiveness of environmen-

tal UV radiation. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B: Biol. 31, 43–49.

Hu, R., Seager, S., 2014. Photochemistry in terrestrial exoplanet atmospheres.
III. Photochemistry and thermochemistry in thick atmospheres on super
Earths and mini Neptunes. Astrophys. J. 784, 63.

Hu, R., Seager, S., Bains, W., 2012. Photochemistry in terrestrial exoplanet at-
mospheres. I. Photochemistry model and benchmark cases. Astrophys. J. 761,
166.

Hu, R., Seager, S., Bains, W., 2013. Photochemistry in terrestrial exoplanet atmo-
spheres. II. H2S and SO2 photochemistry in anoxic atmospheres. Astrophys.
J. 769, 6.

Itikawa, Y., 2006. Cross sections for electron collisions with nitrogen molecules.

J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 35 (1), 31–53.

Jackman, C. H., DeLand, M. T., Labow, G. J., Fleming, E. L., Weisenstein, D. K.,
Ko, M. K. W., Sinnhuber, M., Russell, J. M., 2005. Neutral atmospheric in-
ﬂuences of the solar proton events in October-November 2003. J. Geophys.
Res. 110 (A09), A09S27.

Jackman, C. H., Frederick, J. E., Stolarski, R. S., 1980. Production of odd ni-
trogen in the stratosphere and mesosphere: An intercomparison of source
strengths. J. Geophys. Res. 85 (C12), 7495–7505.

Jones, I. T. N., Bayes, K. D., 1973. Photolysis of nitrogen dioxide. J. Chem.

Phys. 59 (9), 4836–4848.

14

Kasting, J. F., Pollack, J. B., Ackerman, T. P., 1984a. Response of Earth’s at-
mosphere to increases in solar ﬂux and implications for loss of water from
Venus. Icarus 57, 335–355.

Kasting, J. F., Pollack, J. B., Ackerman, T. P., 1984b. Response of Earth’s at-
mosphere to increases in solar ﬂux and implications for loss of water from
Venus. Icarus 57, 335–355.

Kasting, J. F., Whitmire, D. P., Reynolds, R. T., 1993. Habitable zones around

main sequence stars. Icarus 101, 108–128.

Kerr, J. B., McElroy, C. T., 1993. Evidence for large upward trends of ultraviolet-

B radiation linked to ozone depletion. Science 262, 1032–1034.

Khodachenko, M. L., Ribas, I., Lammer, H., Grießmeier, J.-M., Leitner, M.,
Selsis, F., Eiroa, C., Hanslmeier, A., Biernat, H. K., Farrugia, C. J., Rucker,
H. O., 2007. Coronal Mass Ejection (CME) activity of low mass M stars as an
important factor for the habitability of terrestrial exoplanets. I. CME impact
on expected magnetospheres of Earth-like exoplanets in close-in habitable
zones. Astrobiology 7 (1), 167–184.

Lammer, H., Bredeh¨oft, J. H., Coustenis, A., Khodachenko, M. L., Kaltenegger,
L., Grasset, O., Prieur, D., Raulin, F., Ehrenfreund, P., Yamauchi, M.,
Wahlund, J.-E., Grießmeier, J.-M., Stangl, G., Cockell, C. S., Kulikov, Y. N.,
Grenfell, J. L., Rauer, H., 2009. What makes a planet habitable? Astron.
Astrophys. Rev. 17, 181–249.

Lammer, H., Selsis, F., Chasseﬁ`ere, E., Breuer, D., Grießmeier, J.-M., Kulikov,
Y. N., Erkaev, N. V., Khodachenko, M. L., Biernat, H. K., Leblanc, F., Kallio,
E., Lundin, R., Westall, F., Bauer, S. J., Beichman, C., Danchi, W., Eiroa,
C., Fridlund, M., Gr¨oller, H., Hanslmeier, A., Hausleitner, W., Henning, T.,
Herbst, T., Kaltenegger, L., L´eger, A., Leitzinger, M., Lichtenegger, H. I. M.,
Liseau, R., Lunine, J., Motschmann, U., Odert, P., Paresce, F., Parnell, J.,
Penny, A., Quirrenbach, A., Rauer, H., R¨ottgering, H., Schneider, J., Spohn,
T., Stadelmann, A., Stangl, G., Stam, D., Tinetti, G., White, G. J., 2010.
Geophysical and atmospheric evolution of habitable planets. Astrobiology
10 (1), 45–68.

Leggett, S. K., Allard, F., Berriman, G., Dahn, C. C., Hauschildt, P. H., 1996.
Infrared spectra of low-mass stars: Toward a temperature scale for red dwarfs.
Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 104, 117–143.

Magnotta, F., Johnston, H. S., 1980. Photodissociation quantum yields for the

NO3 free radical. Geophys. Res. Lett. 7, 769–772.

Malicet, J., Daumont, D., Charbonnier, J., Parisse, C., Chakir, A., Brion, A.,
1995. Ozone UV spectroscopy. II. Absorption cross-sections and temperature
dependence. J. Atmos. Chem. 21 (3), 263–273.

Manabe, S., Wetherald, R. T., 1967. Thermal equilibrium of the atmosphere with

a given distribution of relative humidity. J. Atmos. Sci. 24 (3), 241–259.

Massie, S. T., Hunten, D. M., 1981. Stratospheric eddy diffusion coefﬁcients

from tracer data. J. Geophys. Res. 86, 9859–9868.

Melsheimer, C., Verdes, C., Buehler, S. A., Emde, C., Eriksson, P., Feist, D. G.,
Ichizawa, S., John, V. O., Kasai, Y., Kopp, G., Koulev, N., Kuhn, T., Lemke,
O., Ochiai, S., Schreier, F., Sreerekha, T. R., Suzuki, M., Takahashi, C.,
Tsujimaru, S., Urban, J., 2005. Intercomparison of general purpose clear sky
atmospheric radiative transfer models for the millimeter/submillimeter spec-
tral range. Radio Sci. 40, RS1007.

Mlawer, E. J., Taubman, S. J., Brown, P. D., Iacono, M. J., Clough, S. A.,
1997. Radiative transfer for inhomogeneous atmospheres: RRTM, a validated
correlated-k model for the longwave. J. Geophys. Res. 102 (D14), 16663–
16682.

Moortgat, G. K., Kudszus, E., 1978. Mathematical expression for the O(1D)
quantum yields from the O3 photolysis as a function of temperature (230-320
K) and wavelength (295-320 nm). Geophys. Res. Lett. 5 (3), 191–194.

O’Brien, K., Friedberg, W., Sauer, H. A., Smart, D. F., 1996. Atmospheric cos-
mic rays and solar energetic particles at aircraft altitude. Environ. Int. 22,
S1–S44.

Pavlov, A. A., Kasting, J. F., 2002. Mass-independent fractionation of sulfur
isotopes in archean sediments: Strong evidence for an anoxic archean atmo-
sphere. Astrobiology 2 (1), 27–41.

Pettersen, B. R., Hawley, S. L., 1989. A spectroscopic survey of red dwarf ﬂare

stars. Astron. Astrophys. 217, 187–200.

Porter, H. S., Jackman, C. H., Green, A. E. S., 1976. Efﬁciencies for production
of atomic nitrogen and oxygen by relativistic proton impact in air. J. Chem.
Phys. 65, 154–167.

Rauer, H., Gebauer, S., von Paris, P., Cabrera, J., Godolt, M., Grenfell, J. L.,
Belu, A., Selsis, F., Hedelt, P., Schreier, F., 2011. Potential biosignatures in
super-Earth atmospheres. I. Spectral appearance of super-Earths around M
dwarfs. Astron. Astrophys. 529, A8.

Rothman, L. S., E.Gordon, I., Barbe, A., Benner, D. C., Bernath, P. F., Birk,
M., Boudon, V., Brown, L. R., Campargue, A., Champion, J.-P., Chance,
K., Coudert, L. H., Dana, V., Devi, V. M., Fally, S., Flaud, J.-M., Gamache,
R. R., Goldman, A., Jacquemart, D., Kleiner, I., Lacome, N., Lafferty, W. J.,
Mandin, J.-Y., Massie, S. T., Mikhailenko, S. N., Miller, C. E., Moazzen-
Ahmadi, N., Naumenko, O. V., Nikitin, A. V., Orphal, J., Perevalov, V. I.,
Perrin, A., Predoi-Cross, A., Rinsland, C. P., Rotger, M., ˇSimeˇckov´a, M.,

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

Smith, M. A. H., Sung, K., Tashkun, S. A., Tennyson, J., Toth, R. A.,
Vandaele, A. C., Auwera, J. V., 2009. The HITRAN 2008 molecular spec-
troscopic database. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 110, 533–572.

Sagan, C., Thomson, W. R., Carlson, R., Gurnett, D., Hord, C., 1993. A search

for life on earth from the Galileo spacecraft. Nature 365, 715–721.

Sander, S. P., Friedl, R. R., Golden, D. M., Kurylo, M. J., Huie, R. E., Orkin,
V. L., Moortgat, G. K., Ravishankara, A. R., Kolb, C. E., Molina, M. J.,
Finlayson-Pitts, B. J., 2003. Chemical kinetics and photochemical data for
use in atmospheric studies, evaluation number 14. Tech. rep., JPL Publication
02-25.

Scalo, J., Kaltenegger, L., Segura, A., Fridlund, M., Ribas, I., Kulikov, Y. N.,
Grenfell, J. L., Rauer, H., Odert, P., Leitzinger, M., Selsis, F., Khodachenko,
M. L., Eiroa, C., Kasting, J., Lammer, H., 2007. M stars as targets for ter-
restrial exoplanet searches and biosignature detection. Astrobiology 7 (1),
85–166.

Schindler, T. L., Kasting, J. F., 2000. Synthetic spectra of simulated terrestrial

atmospheres containing possible biomarker gases. Icarus 145, 262–271.

Schreier, F., Schimpf, B., 2001. A new efﬁcient line-by-line code for high reso-
lution atmospheric radiation computations incl. derivatives. In: Smith, W. L.,
Timofeyev, Y. (Eds.), IRS, 2000: Current problems in atmospheric radiation.
A. Deepak Publishing, pp. 381–384.

Seager, S., Bains, W., Hu, R., 2013. A biomass-based model to estimate the

plausibility of exoplanet biosignature gases. Astrophys. J. 775, 104.

Segura, A., Kasting, J. F., Meadows, V., Cohen, M., Scalo, J., Crisp, D., Butler,
R. A. H., Tinetti, G., 2005. Biosignatures from Earth-like planets around M
dwarfs. Astrobiology 5 (6), 706–725.

Segura, A., Krelove, K., Kasting, J. F., Sommerlatt, D., Meadows, V., Crisp, D.,
Cohen, M., Mlawer, E., 2003. Ozone concentrations and ultraviolet ﬂuxes on
Earth-like planets around other stars. Astrobiology 3 (4), 689–708.

Segura, A., Meadows, V., Kasting, J. F., Crisp, D., Cohen, M., 2007. Abiotic for-
mation of O2 and O3 in high-CO2 terrestrial atmospheres. Astron. Astrophys.
472, 665–679.

Segura, A., Walkowicz, L. M., Meadows, V., Kasting, J., Hawley, S., 2010. The
effect of a strong stellar ﬂare on the atmospheric chemistry of an Earth-like
planet orbiting an M dwarf. Astrobiology 10 (7), 751–771.

Selsis, F., Chazelas, B., Bord´e, P., Ollivier, M., Brachet, F., Decaudin, M.,
Bouchy, F., Ehrenreich, D., Grießmeier, J.-M., Lammer, H., Sotin, C.,
Grasset, O., Moutou, C., Barge, P., Deleuil, M., Mawet, D., Despois, D.,
Kasting, J. F., L´eger, A., 2007. Could we identify hot ocean-planets with
CoRoT, Kepler and Doppler velocimetry? Icarus 191, 453–468.

Selsis, F., Despois, D., Parisot, J.-P., 2002. Signature of life on exoplanets: Can
Darwin produce false positive detections? Astron. Astrophys. 388, 985–1003.
Shea, M. A., Smart, D. F., 2000. Cosmic ray implications for human health.

Space Sci. Rev. 93, 187–205.

Smith, D. S., Scalo, J., Wheeler, J. C., 2004. Transport of ionizing radiation in

terrestrial-like exoplanet atmospheres. Icarus 171, 229–253.

Tabataba-Vakili, F., Grenfell, J. L., Grießmeier, J.-M., Rauer, H., 2016.
Atmospheric effects of stellar cosmic rays on Earth-like exoplanets orbiting
M-dwarfs. Astron. Astrophys. 585, A96.

Tian, F., France, K., Linsky, J. L., Mauas, P. J. D., Vieytes, M. C., 2014. High
stellar FUV/NUV ratio and oxygen contents in the atmospheres of potentially
habitable planets. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 385, 22–27.

Toon, O. B., McKay, C. P., Ackerman, T. P., Santhanam, K., 1989. Rapid calcula-
tion of radiative heating rates and photodissociation rates in inhomogeneous
multiple scattering atmospheres. J. Geophys. Res. 94, 16287–16301.

Vardavas, I. M., Carver, J. H., 1984. Solar and terrestrial parameterizations for

radiative-convective models. Planet. Space Sci. 32 (10), 1307–1325.

von Paris, P., Cabrera, J., Godolt, M., Grenfell, J. L., Hedelt, P., Rauer, H.,
Schreier, F., Stracke, B., 2011. Spectroscopic characterization of the atmo-
spheres of potentially habitable planets: GL 581 d as a model case study.
Astron. Astrophys. 534, A26.

von Paris, P., Hedelt, P., Selsis, F., Schreier, F., Trautmann, T., 2013.
Characterization of potentially habitable planets: Retrieval of atmospheric
and planetary properties from emission spectra. Astron. Astrophys. 551,
A120.

Yao, F., Wilson, I., Johnston, H., 1982. Temperature-dependent ultraviolet ab-
sorption spectrum for dinitrogen pentoxide. J. Phys. Chem. 86, 3611–3615.

15

J.–M. Grießmeier et al.: Galactic cosmic rays on extrasolar Earth-like planets: II.

Column 1

Column 2

3

4

case

E
E

CA
CA
CA
CA
CA

LF
LF
LF
LF
LF

SF
SF
SF
SF
SF

M
[M⊕]
1.0

no GCR

0.0
0.1
1.0
10.0

no GCR

0.0
0.1
1.0
10.0

no GCR

0.0
0.1
1.0
10.0

no GCR

IUV-A
TOA
[W/m2]

127
127

2.01
2.01
2.01
2.01
2.01

112
112
112
112
112

112
112
112
112
112

IUV-A
surface
[W/m2]
90.41
90.41

1.479
1.479
1.477
1.477
1.477

75.75
75.75
75.79
75.80
75.81

76.50
76.47
76.37
76.33
76.33

5

RUV-A

0.71
0.71

0.74
0.74
0.74
0.74
0.74

0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68

0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68

6

IUV-B
TOA
[W/m2]
18.29
18.29

0.202
0.202
0.201
0.200
0.200

47
47
47
47
47

47
47
47
47
47

7
IUV-B
surface
[W/m2]
2.264
2.256

0.0225
0.0221
0.0204
0.0198
0.0197

3.053
3.054
3.084
3.099
3.100

5.10
5.00
4.65
4.52
4.51

8

RUV-B

0.12
0.12

0.11
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10

0.065
0.065
0.066
0.066
0.066

0.11
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10

9

W

[W/m2]
0.126
0.125

0.0021
0.0020
0.0016
0.0015
0.0015

0.145
0.145
0.148
0.149
0.150

0.55
0.52
0.42
0.39
0.39

Table 1. UV-A and UV-B ﬂux at top of atmosphere (ITOA) and the surface (Isurface) for different cases. Also shown: wavelength-
range averaged ﬂux ratio R = Isurface/ITOA (i.e. atmospheric transmission coefﬁcient), and biologically weighted surface UV ﬂux W
(in weighted W/m2). Cases: E = Earth, CA = chromospherically active star, LF = long ﬂare, SF = short ﬂare (see text for details).

16

