6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
2

 
 
]
T
R
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

2
v
6
0
5
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A new type of diagrams for modules

Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, School of Mathematics

by Stephanos Gekas

20 March 2016

Abstract

We introduce a new type of diagrams and prove the existence of a
particular one, the ”central tuned diagram”, with some optimal features,
for every ﬁnitely generated module over a Frobenius algebra.

1 Introduction

We prove the existence of a diagram for every A-module M of ﬁnite k-dimension
over a Frobenius k-algebra A.

This is done by proving the existence of a particular, well deﬁned diagram,
to be called ”the central tuned diagram”, which is made so as to illustrate the
longest (in radical length) indecomposable summands (”longest pillars”) of rad-
ical sections (i.e., of sections of the type Radi (M ) /Radj (M )) as the connected
components of the relevant radical section of the diagram. The problem would
not be so hard, if there were no isomorphic idecomposable summands in radical
sections, in particular, isomorphic irreducibles in a radical layer: This is also
why all previous eﬀorts to obain some module diagrams, that we know of, have
essentially restricted themselves to this particular special case.

To that purpose we introduce the notion of virtual radical (or, dually, so-
cle) series of M (and, of course, of A itself), in which the simple costituents
of the series are not just determined up to isomorphism but elementwise (set-
theoretically). The easiest way to conceive the idea is through ﬁltrations. When-
ever we have a direct sum of isomorphic indecomposables, a realization is an
(elementwise) choice of an expression of that sum; in the process of realization
priority is given to the longest pillars. The realization of the minor pillars (in
radical subsections of the radical sections of the major pillars) shall then be
subjugated to the realizations of the major ones; this is a key idea, which we
refer to as ”vertical priority”.

After those coordinated (”tuned”) ”realizations”, we appeal to the relevant
extension theory of S by N and its interpretation in terms of homomorphisms
in HomA (cid:0)Ω1S, N(cid:1) (for A an artinian ring or a Frobenius algebra), monitored
by means of the second virtual radical layer. In the same context we introduce

1

the intuitively very important notion of proportion class of an extension. That
theory is brieﬂy reviewed with a fresh eye and some (may be) new insights in
the next section.

Our thoughts with our module diagram extend to two directions: To high-
light, (a) the section structure / the possible ﬁltrations, (b) homomorphisms
between modules, in particular automorphisms and endomorphisms. The case
of automorphisms is of a crucial importance, as any homomorphism between
modules may be viewed as the composition α ◦ h ◦ β, where α, β automorphisms
(α of a submodule-image, β of a factor module-coimage) and h a canonical ho-
momorphism, the elucidation of which is the same as that of submodules and
factor modules.

By doing that, it shall be possible to get to complicated diagrams from
simpler subdiagrams, corresponding to their sections. In this respect, the asser-
tion on the existence of such a diagram and its properties shall be of a crucial
relevance.

We intend to investigate such possibilities and exemplify them properly in
future work. Among others, we wish to investigate, to what extend we can
establish a similar diagram in other module categories; of particular interest
would be to obtain some almost similar ”nice” diagrams for injective modules
of a reductive, or of a simply connected semisimple algebraic group over an
algebraically closed ﬁeld of positive characteristic, allowing us then much better
to follow those modules down to the corresponding ﬁnite grous (of Lie type),
when restricting to the kernel of the proper Frobenius endomorphism, especially
if we can get to know how the injective hulls of the simple modules of the (big)
algebraic group are expressible in terms of p.i.m.’s of the ﬁnite one, after their
restriction. In that case, we have to start from the representation theory of such
algebraic groups; in this respect of particular interest for the reduction shall be
Steinberg’s tensor product theorem.

Notation 1 For a ring R we shall denote the i’th power Jacobson radical by
J i (R), while for the i’th power Jacobson radical of a (left, when nothing else is
said) R-module M we shall use both J i (R) M and Radi (M ).

2 Ext, Hom traced on ”virtual” radical (/socle)

series

Deﬁnition 2 A virtual radical (resp. socle) series of a module is one where
the simple constituents on each layer are not just meant as ”isomorphic copies”,
but they have also been speciﬁed set-theoretically.

2

Notice that the subsequent orders (”powers”) of the radical, respectively of
the socle, are submodules, thus set-theoretically well deﬁned (with respect to
the original module). However, when taking the quotient of subsequent orders
of radical (resp. socle), in order to form the layers of the series, one just de-
ﬁnes them up to isomorphism. We wish here to break with this tradition: To
this end, we consider the constituents of each layer set-theoretically
as consisting of cosets of the next order radical (resp., of the previ-
ous order socle). This subtle diﬀerentiation opens up for new insights and
possibilities, as I am beginning to exhibit in this paper.

However, in order to get full advantage of it, we must ﬁnd an optimal way
of choosing the direct summands on each layer in the cases of more than one
isomorphic copies of irreducibles. This shall in turn lead to a natural notion of
diagram, depicting the structure of the module. We begin with some prepara-
tory revision and reinforcement of some very closely related facts.

In what follows we shall be considering a Frobenius k-algebra A (for example
a ﬁnite-group algebra) and by ”modules” we mean left A-modules (always ﬁnite
dimensional as k-vector spaces). Of course, we are thinking of group algebras
over ﬁelds of characteristic p 6= 0 dividing the order of the group, since otherwise,
according to Maschke’s theorem, the group algebra be semisimple - and hence
uninteresting to us.

Let V be an A-module and consider a virtual radical (and a virtual socle)

series of it.

Proposition 3 If φ is a non-zero (A-)homomorphism V J (A) −→ N ,
cannot factor through a projective A-module.

then φ

Proof. First proof:

By isolating the relevant summand, we may reduce to the case that V is

indecomposable.

Let, so, φ factor through P : φ = ba, where b : P −→ N .
We are ﬁrst proving that then, φ does also factor through V ’s injective
hull, say Q. Consider V embedded as a submodule of Q; then, apparently,
J (A) V ⊆ J (A) Q.

Q
ι ↑

V J (A)

ψ− → P
a ր ↓ b
φ ։ N

↑
0

Due to P ’s injectivity we get ψ : Q −→ P , such

that ψι = a, hence (bψ) ι = φ.

Since N is simple, bψ : Q −→ N suggests QJ (A) ⊆ ker bψ, hence also

V J (A) ⊆ ker bψ, which necessarily means φ = 0, a contradiction.

Second proof:
φ induces an isomorphism N1 −→ N for some simple submodule N1 of
J (A) V /J 2 (A) V . In case φ factors through a projective P , say by ι : J (A) V −→

3

P , that induced isomorphism N1g−→N necessarily factors through the one in-
duced from Im (ι)’s head. But since b induces an epimorphism from P ’s head
onto N , it becomes clear that Im (ι)’s head lies in P ’s head. Hence P ’s head
contains an isomorphic copy of N .

We are ﬁrst proving that φ does also factor through N ’s projective cover,

say PN .
P
ι ↑

V J (A)

−− → PN
b ց
↓
φ ։ N
↓
0

In case P is not isomorphic to the projective cover

of N , then its head, as noticed containing an isomorphic copy of N , must also
contain more irreducibles than that (see f.ex.
[4, 6.25(i), p. 133]). On the
other hand, by P ’s projectivity we get a homomorphism P −→ PN , which is
surjective, since it induces an epimorphism onto PN ’s simple head N , and which
∼= PN and
must then split, due to PN ’s projectivity: P = P0 ⊕ P
P0 = ker ( P −→ PN ), another projective, as a direct summand of a projective.
For the same reason the composite σ : J (A) V −→ PN is an epimorphism (as
inducing an isomorphism N1g−→N onto the head of PN ), thus split, yielding
V J (A) = ker σ ⊕ M , with M ∼= PN , thus giving a composite monomorphism
ζ : PN ֌ J (A) V ֌ V , which has to split, as PN is injective too, since A has
been assumed to be (symmetric, hence also) (quasi-)Frobenius. But this does
also imply that the Hd (ζ (PN )) = N1 (notice also here the ”=” instead of ”∼=”!)
is a direct summand in Hd (V ), contrary to the fact that N1 is actually in the
second layer of the virtual radical series of V .

N , with P

′

′

N

Remark 4 We wish here to emphasize that, by saying ” φ : M −→ N factors
through a projective” is meant that it may be written as a composition with some
β : P −→ N , i.e. from P to N !

We remind the reader that the Heller operators ΩnV = ker (∂n−1 : Pn−1 −→ Pn−2)

(for n > 0 and a minimal projective resolution of V - dually for n < 0) may
only be deﬁned in a category of ﬁnitely generated A-modules, where the Krull-
Schmidt theorem holds and hence a unique minimal projective resolution is
available; to this end, it is actually suﬃcient to assume that the ring A is (left-)
artinian (see [4] for a proof), an assumption that we are keeping to here. Oth-
erwise these operators are in general only deﬁnable in the stable category, i.e.
up to a projective direct summand.

Lemma 5 If φ is a non-zero (A-)homomorphism ΩnV −→ N (A a Frobenius
k-algebra, N simple, n > 0),
then φ cannot factor through a projective A-
module.

4

Proof. By taking a minimal projective resolution of V, ... −→ P1 −→ P0 −→

V −→ 0 , ΩnV is isomorphic to ker (∂n−1 : Pn−1 −→ Pn−2), embedded in Pn−1
through, say, ι. Appealing to the Frobenius property, P is injective too, which
forces a to factor through ψ : Pn−1 −→ P . We may then again proceed in two
ways:

First proof:
Pn−1 ψ− → P
a ր ↓ b
φ ։ N

ι ↑
ΩnV

↑
0

Due to the minimality of the resolution, ΩnV ⊆

J (A) Pn−1; on the other hand, since N = Im (bψ) is simple, we get J (A) Pn−1 ⊆
ker (bψ), therefore also is bψι (meaning here, the restriction of bψ to ΩnV ) equal
to 0, hence φ = 0, contrary to our assumption.

Second proof:
By arguing in the same way as in the second proof of the proposition above,
we get by assuming that φ factors through a projective P , that ΩnV has a
projective direct summand isomorphic to the projective cover of N , which con-
tradicts the minimality of our resolution.

By dualizing (either by starting with a minimal injective resolution and
mirror the above proof or by using the isomorphism Ω−nV ∼= Ωn (V ∗)∗ and the
lemma), we get the following

Corollary 6 If φ is a non-zero (A-)homomorphism N −→ Ω−nV (A left ar-
tinian, N simple, n>0), then φ cannot factor through a projective A-module.

Let now A be a Frobenius algebra, in which case the category A mod of (left)

A-modules is a Frobenius category.

Furthermore we are now for a moment shifting our contemplation from the
category A mod into the (triangulated) stable category Ast mod, which still has
the same objects as A mod (although we are now getting much bigger/fewer
isomorphism classes of them), but whose morphisms HomA (, ) are obtained
as equivalence classes in HomA (, ) modulo the ”ideal” (in the sense of an
additive category) P Hom(, ), consisting of those homomorphisms, that factor
through a projective module; i.e., given two A-modules M , N , HomA (M, N ) =
HomA(M, N )/P HomA(M, N ). This is a triangulated category with translation
functor T = Ω−1. A very important point in considering the stable category is
the fact that

Extn

A (M, N ) ∼= HomA (ΩnM, N ) ∼= HomA (cid:0)M, Ω−nN(cid:1)

(1)

for any n ∈ Z (See f.ex. [3, 5.1, also 5.2 & 4.4(v)]).

5

Up to this point it would be enough to have a Frobenius category, such as
the category A mod of modules over a Frobenius algebra A. If we now specialize
in the case, where A is a group algebra kG over a ﬁnite group G, which also
is our main motivation, then we have an algebra that is not only artinian and
Frobenius, but also symmetric. For a symmetric k-algebra A the p.i.m.’s (prin-
cipal indecomposable modules, i.e. the projective covers [being here the same as
the injective hulls] of its simple modules) have isomorphic head and socle (see
f.ex. [7, I 7.5(iii)] ); for a more general category-theoretic set-up and approach
to the stable category and related topics see f.ex.
[6], for more speciﬁc details
as to the triangulization of the stable category of modules over a ﬁnite-group
algebra see [3].

Our Lemma with its Corollary above, together with relation (1), imply the

following

Proposition 7 Given a Frobenius algebra A, the A-modules M , N , where N is
A (N, M ) ∼=
simple, for n > 0 we have Extn
HomA (N, Ω−nM ).

A (M, N ) ∼= HomA (ΩnM, N ) and Extn

its Corollary, gives P HomA(ΩnM, N ) = 0 and,
Proof. Our Lemma, resp.
respectively, P HomA (N, Ω−nM ) = 0 - which, by virtue of the two relations
(1), yield the results.

Remark 8 We note that, by following upon the line of the proof of the above
Lemma 5, we can show the proposition indepedently of the relations (1), for any
artinian algebra; see for example [1, 2.5.4].

We are going to pursue this correspondence further, by following it along the
virtual series in detail: a possibility which is only there, if we are considering
the virtual instead of the usual series.

Deﬁnition 9 We call two extensions 0 −→ Nκ −→ Bκ −→ S −→ 0, κ = 1, 2,
”proportional” if there are isomorphisms σ : N1 −→ N2 and B1 −→ B2, such
0 → N1 −→ B1 −→ S → 0

that the following diagram commute:

↓ σ

↓

k

0 → N2 −→ B2 −→ S → 0
We shall call σ their ”proportion”; in case N is simple, σ corresponds to a
non-zero element of the ﬁeld k, as then AutA (N ) ∼= k∗ (Schur’s Lemma).

6

Notice that in this deﬁnition we did not assume Nκ (κ = 1, 2) and S to be
simple; however we are primarily going to apply the concept in that case. This
deﬁnes an equivalence relation on the set of extensions of S by N , the classes
of which we shall call ”proportionaliy classes”.

Notation 10 Let now V be an A-module, with simple head S; this forces V to
be indecomposable. and with second virtual radical series layer V J (A) /V J 2 (A) =
rL
Ni ⊕ W (J (A) denotes the Jacobson radical of A), where N1 ∼= N2 ∼= ... ∼=
Nr ∼= N simple A-modules and W is a sum of irreducibles, all non-isomorphic
to N . Notice that we have put ”=” and not ”∼=”: that is due to our set-
theoretically virtual approach. For κ = 1, ..., r we get a factor module Bκ =

i=1

, which we may determine more precisely as follows: Let V J (A) /V J 2 (A) =

S
Nκ
Nκ ⊕ Rκ and let π : V J (A) ։ V J (A) /V J 2 (A) be the natural epimorphism.
Then Bκ := V /π−1 (Rκ).

As it is well-known, the elements of Extn

A (M, N ) are in 1-1 correspondence
with the set of equivalence classes of n-extensions of M by N (see [3, Th. 6.3,
p. 29]). Due to the isomorphism above, we do also get an 1-1 correspondence
between HomA (ΩnM, N ) and the set of equivalence classes of n-extensions of
M by N ; that correspondence is in terms of HomA (ΩnM, N ) precisely speciﬁed
in [1, 2.6, p. 40]. We shall mainly be concerned with this correspondence for
n = 1 and for modules over a symmetric algebra, in which case we also have
Proposition .

Adjusting to the standard notation, call ζ κ the element of Ext1

A (M, N ),
which corresponds to the canonical surjection bζ κ : Ω1 (S) ։ Nκ, and let Lκ
designate its kernel.
Let us now consider the standard minimal projective relolution of S, where
we will denote the projective cover os S as P0, with the whole resolution taken
in a set-theoretically virtual way, thus enabling us f.ex. to consider P0/P0J (A)
(now, of course, Ω1S is the same as radical, P0J (A)) as equal and not just
isomorphic to S - and so on, for the whole complex! It may appear wierd doing
so, while moving ”up the hill” in subsequent epimorphisms (which we want to
be able to identify as ”the natural ones”, i.e. as gotten by taking the quotients
by submodules, which allows for virtuality), but we may always start up at
the necessary level and move ”downhill”, down to modules consisting of (ever
bigger) cosets.

Let us use the notation above for the module P0 in place of V , where we

→ P1 → P2
|
|
↓
0 −→ Nκ −− − − − → Bκ −→ S → 0

P1
|
µ1|
↓ ւ bζ κ

−→
ր |
|
↓

P0 −→ S → 0

Ω1S

µ0

k

now have Lκ = π−1 (Rκ), in the above notation.
∂2

∂2−→

q ց

7

We know that any two diﬀerent homomorphisms bζ κ : Ω1S −→ N , i=1,2,
represent diﬀerent classes in Ext1
A (S, N ), hence also non-equivalent extensions;
of course, those diﬀerent homomorphisms are in 1-1 correpondence to the ho-
momorphisms ζ κ : Hd(cid:0)Ω1S(cid:1) −→ N , which are in turn up to an automorphism
of N (meaning here up to an automorphism of Nκ) determined by ker(cid:0)ζ κ(cid:1). But
”up to an automorphism of Nκ” means ”up to a proportion”, in view of our
deﬁnition; i.e. each direct summand in Hd(cid:0)Ω1S(cid:1) determines a proportionality
class. Hence we get the following

A (S, N )) iﬀ their induced homomorphisms Hd(cid:0)Ω1S(cid:1) −→

Theorem 11 With the above notation, two homomorphisms in HomA (cid:0)Ω1S, N(cid:1)
correspond to proportional extensions of S by N (equivalently, they correspond to
each other’s multiple in Ext1
N have the same kernel. We may thus have a precisely determined A-homomorphic
A (S, N )f↔HomA (cid:0)Hd(cid:0)Ω1S(cid:1) , N(cid:1) ∼= kr (by Schur’s lemma),
correspondence Ext1
where r is the number of direct summands of Hd(cid:0)Ω1S(cid:1), that are isomorphic
to N , whereby the propotionality class of an extension B of P0’s head S by
N is determined by the direct summand isomorphic to N in Hd(cid:0)Ω1S(cid:1) that is
involved (: is not in the kernel).

Theorem 12 For a module V as above, i.e. with simple head S and with
Ni ⊕ W , where N1 ∼= N2 ∼= ... ∼= Nr ∼= N simple A-

J (A) V /J 2 (A) V =

rL

i=1

modules and W is a sum of irreducibles, all non-isomorphic to N , the elements
in Ext1
A (S, N ) corresponding to the equivalence classes of the r extensions 0 −→
Nκ −→ Bκ −→ S −→ 0

(Nκ ∼= N ) are again k-linearly independent.

Conversely, if a module V with the simple S in its head has r factor mod-
, with Nκ ∼= N , κ = 1, ..., r, with that S on the head,

ules of the type

S
Nκ

so that these r extensions correspond to r k-linearly independent elements in

Ext1

A (S, N ), then we have an injection

Nκ ֒→ J (A) V /J 2 (A) V ,i.e., we get

rL

i=1

to a non-split extension 0 −→

module of V .

rL

i=1

Nκ −→ B −→ S −→ 0 , where B is a factor

Proof. By pointing out that we have an epimorphism onto V from the pro-

jective cover PS of S, we may substitute PS for V and study the lifts of these
extensions there; the reason why this epimorphism exists is that the projective
cover of V is just PS, i.e. the same as the projective cover of its head S (see

8

[4, 6,23 or 6.25 (ii)] ). Speaking in terms of virtual radical layers, we may lift
the chosen Nκ’s along PS ։ V , set theoretically and elementwise, to ones now
consisting of bigger cosets as elements, in a procedure that clearly respects
the extension classes of the Bκ’s.

The converse is clear.

3 Module Diagrams

Condition 13 By viewing the elements (of the irreducibles of ) each radical
layer as the biggest possible (: down to the last layer) cosets, it becomes possible
to project them to the lesser cosets, enabling us to IDENTIFY the radical sub-
sections of radical sections to their canonically isomorphic sections, i.e. identify
any isomorphic pairs of the type
Radi (M ) /Radj (M ), (cid:0)Radi (M ) /Radj+λ (M )(cid:1) (cid:30)(cid:0)Radj (M ) /Radj+λ (M )(cid:1)

(i < j). We are taking this identiﬁcation for given throughout this work.

We note further that the ”virtuality” of the radical layers is also
conceivable through suitable (: compatible) ﬁltrations, a point that is
also important to keep in mind.

A shall be a Frobenius k-algebra from now on.
As we have seen (Theorem 12), whenever we have an indecomposable with
simple head, that simple forms non-split extensions with all virtual irreducibles
on the next radical layer, which are all k-linearly independent in case they are
isomorphic; further, if the indecomposable is a p.i.m., those extensions corre-
spond to a k-basis of the proper Ext1

A module.

To start moving toward a diagram of an indecomposable module, we may
attach a vertex to each simple at all layers, and start by joining the vertex
corresponding to the simple head with all the vertices of the second layer, give
the edges an ”upward” orientation, and attach to each of them the corresponding
extension class (equivalently, the corresponding elements of Ext1

A).

We may proceed this way, by taking the indecomposable subfactors with the
simple heads of the subsequent layers and join each simple head to the essential
irreducibles of the next radical layer of the relevant indecomposable sector, but
such a process raises many subtle conditions, to make it possible.

We have a freedom of choice on ”essential” irreducible summands, whenever
there are multiple isomorphic copies on a layer, resulting in a variation of the
extension classes, according to Theorem . However it is very important to make
a properly coordinated choice of virtual irreducibles on the diﬀerent layers, so as
to make the process possible, and also get to a nicely ”tuned” diagram, instead

9

of a possibly chaotic picture. But what does it exactly mean for a diagram to
be thus ”nice”? We are thus lead to the notion of a ”tuned” diagram:

Deﬁnition 14 We call a diagram that is associated to a virtual radical series
a tuned one, if the following condition is satisﬁed: For 0 ≤ i < j , the inde-
composable summands of the ”radical section” Radi (M ) /Radj (M ) correspond
precisely to the connected components of the corresponding section of diagram.
Such indecomposable summands will be called ”{i, j}-pillars”, of height j − i.
An {i, j}-colonnade is a maximal direct sum of (at least two) isomorphic {i, j}-
pillars. A realization of such a colonnade is any speciﬁc choice of pillars for
the expression of the colonnade as a direct sum. A single pillar of a radical
section is a indecomposable direct summand with no other isomorphic summand
in the same radical section.

Deﬁnition 15 We introduce a partial ordering ”⊑” in the set Π of colonnades
of a module M , meaning that there is a realization of the ”smaller”, of which at
least one pillar is a section of a pillar of a realization of the bigger one and also
the height of the smaller is strictly smaller. We shall be especially interested in
the maximal colonnades with respect to this ordering.

Deﬁnition 16 The previous deﬁnition may also be extended to include just any
section of M : Given sections A, B of M , we say that B ⊑ A if B is a section of
A - but not a direct summand of it; we shall then also say that A overcoats B.
A peak of a colonnade is a single pillar that overcoats a pillar of the colonnade.

Proposition 17 We may to every ﬁnitely generated A-module M attach a cer-
tain tuned radical diagram, to be called central radical diagram, which is
unique up to graph isomorphism. In particular, there is always a tuned radical
diagram.

Proof. SKETCH OF PROOF:

Clearly, it suﬃces to show it for an indecomposable module M .
We proceed to construct such a diagram:
Take all peaks and all maximal colonnades. Prove that they cannot overlap.
Investigate possible diﬀerentiation of some realizations of maximal colonnades,
prefer the ones that highlight them. ”VERTICAL PRIORITY”.

Consider then for any ”⊑”-maximal {i, j}-colonnade the ”⊑”-maximal in-
decomposable {i − 1, j + 1}-overcoat (where, if either i − 1 or j + 1 layer non-
existing, take i, resp. j instead), call them ”pillar bricks”; show that they can
only overlap on their endlayers, same or opposite direction (use maximality of
colonnades).

10

Our construction ensures that we do not mess with pillar-realizations, en-
suring ”vertical priority”, in the sense that the ”broader” (radical) section con-
sideration comes before the lesser, narrower ones in the realization process.

We shall have to show, that pillar bricks can only overlap at their endlayers
(not diﬃcult to show, due to the construction terms) and only in a splitting way
(due to maximality condition).

Inside each brick, we consider the maximal indecomposables with one of
the (virtually determined) irreducibles of the head as their simple head. We
repeat the process in narrower radical sections inside the radical section of each
maximal pillar, as many times as possible: That means, repeating the process
inside the pillars of the maximal colonnades.

By taking all the indecomposables with simple head, we join the simple head
by an edge with all irreducibles on its next radical layer, while attaching the
proper extension-class to it.

Thus we get a diagram, which can easily be shown to be an optimally tuned

one, in the sense of ”vertical priority”.

Conclusion 18 We achieve a ﬁnal diagram out of a ”radical” one in the
following way:

By virtue of the above Condition , we may then identify the virtual ir-
reducibles of the radical series as contents of the socle series, not necessarily
at the same layers: The virtual irreducibles that are ”hanging loosely” from
the preceding radical layer shall fall down to a lower layer of the socle series.
This provides the missing edges of the module diagram, by considering dually
now the indecomposable sections with a simple head in the subsequent socle
layer; those indecomposables are the same as the ones we considered through
the vitrtual radical series. Thus we get to the important

Theorem 19 We may to every ﬁnitely generated A-module M attach a certain
tuned diagram, to be called the central diagram, which is unique up to graph
isomorphism. In particular, there is always a tuned diagram.

Thinking of the virtual radical, resp. socle, series in terms of compatible ﬁl-
trations, we may read such ﬁltrations either ”downward”, i.e. from the bigger to
the smaller (as in radical series), or upward (like the socle series). In the former
case, a step is non-split whenever the next term looses a (virtual) irreducible
of the next radical layer; dually in the latter case, a step upward is non-split
whenever the next term gains a (virtual) irreducible of the next (:higher) socle
layer.

It is not diﬃcult to prove that it is possible to make a diagram that somehow
highlights a particular section of the module. A lot of relevant questions arise:

11

Can we consider the totality of tuned diagrams for a module? May some of
them ”lead” to all others - or to a family of them?

The Theorem of existence of a tuned diagram can become a powerful tool
in many situations. In our following research we shall try to illustrate this by
some important examples.

I have been working with such examples as a young stundent in the late
’80’s; my work was then interrupted, due to outer conditions and personal obli-
gations. After resuming my mathematical activity recently, I have found in
[2] the only diagrammatic method that I know of, that somehow resembles my
own approach. There is, however, a fundamental diﬀerence from mine in theirs:
Contrary to what I am doing, they start with deﬁning abstract diagrams, and
then they are looking for modules ”representing” them, if any. Nonetheless that
article is very important, also from my point of view, especially whenever such
a diagram as theirs has a unique representation ([2, 5.1]).

Therefore, I am going to adapt the terminology related to the diagrams
deﬁned here to the terminology of that important work; in particular, adopt
their deﬁnition of open and closed subdiagrams.

References

[1] David J. Benson, Representations and Cohomology I, Cambridge Studies in

Advanced Mathematics, 1991 (No. 30)

[2] David J. Benson, Jon F. Carlson, Diagrammatic methods for modular rep-
resentations and cohomology. Communications in Algebra, 01/1987; 15(1-
2):53-121. DOI: 10.1080/00927878708823414

[3] Jon F. Carlson, Modules and Group Algebras. Lectures in Mathematics,

ETH Z¨urich. Birkh¨auser Verlag, 1996.

[4] Charles W. Curtis, Irving Reiner, Methods of representation theory with

applications to ﬁnite groups and orders, vol. 1, Wiley, 1981

[5] Peter J. Hilton, Urs Stammbach; A Course in Homological Algebra. Springer

GTM (nr. 4, 1971, new edition: 1997)

[6] Henning Krause, Derived categories, resolutions, and Brown representability.

Lecture notes from summer school, Chicago 2004.

[7] Peter Landrock, Finite Group Algebras and Their Modules. LMS Lecture

Notes Series (84),Cambridge University Press (1984)

12

