Measurement and tricubic interpolation of the magnetic ﬁeld

for the OLYMPUS experiment

J. C. Bernauera, J. Diefenbachb,1, G. Elbakianc, G. Gavrilovd, N. Goerrissene, D. K. Hasella, B. S. Hendersona,∗, Y. Hollere,

G. Karyanc, J. Ludwige, H. Marukyanc, Y. Naryshkind, C. O’Connora, R. L. Russella, A. Schmidta, U. Schneeklothe, K. Suvorovd,

D. Veretennikovd

aMassachusetts Institute of Technology, Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Cambridge, MA, USA

cAlikhanyan National Science Laboratory (Yerevan Physics Institute), Yerevan, Armenia

bHampton University, Hampton, VA, USA

dPetersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, Russia

eDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Hamburg, Germany

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
1
5
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
The OLYMPUS experiment used a 0.3 T toroidal magnetic spectrometer to measure the momenta of outgoing charged particles.
In order to accurately determine particle trajectories, knowledge of the magnetic ﬁeld was needed throughout the spectrometer
volume. For that purpose, the magnetic ﬁeld was measured at over 36,000 positions using a three-dimensional Hall probe actuated
by a system of translation tables. We used these ﬁeld data to ﬁt a numerical magnetic ﬁeld model, which could be employed to
calculate the magnetic ﬁeld at any point in the spectrometer volume. Calculations with this model were computationally intensive;
for analysis applications where speed was crucial, we pre-computed the magnetic ﬁeld and its derivatives on an evenly spaced grid
so that the ﬁeld could be interpolated between grid points. We developed a spline-based interpolation scheme suitable for SIMD
implementations, with a memory layout chosen to minimize space and optimize the cache behavior to quickly calculate ﬁeld values.
This scheme requires only one-eighth of the memory needed to store necessary coeﬃcients compared with a previous scheme [1].
This method was accurate for the vast majority of the spectrometer volume, though special ﬁts and representations were needed to
improve the accuracy close to the magnet coils and along the toroid axis.

Keywords:
OLYMPUS, magnet, Hall probe, survey, 3D interpolation, tricubic spline

1. Introduction

OLYMPUS is a particle physics experiment comparing the
elastic cross section for positron-proton scattering to that of
electron-proton scattering [2]. This measurement has been of
interest recently because it tests the hypothesis that hard two-
photon exchange is responsible for the proton form factor dis-
crepancy [3, 4]. OLYMPUS took data in 2012 and 2013 at
the DORIS storage ring at DESY, in Hamburg, Germany. Dur-
ing data taking, beams of electrons and positrons were directed
through a windowless hydrogen gas target. The scattered lep-
ton and recoiling proton from elastic scattering events were de-
tected in coincidence with a toroidal magnetic spectrometer.
The spectrometer’s support structure, magnet, and several sub-
detectors were originally part of the BLAST experiment [5].
Several new detectors were specially built for OLYMPUS to
serve as luminosity monitors. A schematic of the apparatus is
shown in Figure 1.

The OLYMPUS spectrometer used a magnetic ﬁeld for two
purposes. First, the ﬁeld produced curvature in the trajectories

∗Corresponding author
Email address: bhender1@mit.edu (B. S. Henderson)
1Currently with Johannes Gutenberg-Universit¨at, Mainz, Germany

Preprint submitted to Nuclear Instruments and Methods A

y

z

x

beam direction

target chamber

5 m

Figure 1: This schematic shows how the eight magnet coils are situated around
the OLYMPUS detectors.

March 22, 2016

of charged particles so that the detectors could measure their
momentum. Typical momenta of particles from elastic scat-
tering reactions ranged from 0.2 to 2 GeV/c, corresponding to
sagittas as small as 5 mm in the OLYMPUS tracking detectors.
Secondly, the magnet acted as a ﬁlter, preventing low-energy
charged particles (from background processes like Møller or
Bhabha scattering) from reaching the tracking detectors.

Figure 2: Individual magnet coils were narrower at the upstream end to accom-
modate the target chamber.

The OLYMPUS magnet consisted of eight coils, identical in
shape, each with 26 windings of hollow copper bars potted to-
gether with epoxy. The coil shape is shown in Figure 2. The
coils were arranged to produce a toroidal ﬁeld, with the beam-
line passing down the symmetry axis of the toroid. During
OLYMPUS running, the coils carried 5000 A of current, which
produced a peak ﬁeld of approximately 0.3 T.

Knowledge of the spectrometer’s magnetic ﬁeld was neces-
sary for reconstructing particle trajectories through the OLYM-
PUS spectrometer. However, calculating the ﬁeld using the de-
sign drawings and the Biot-Savart law was not feasible for two
reasons. First, the positions of the copper bars within the epoxy
were not well known. Secondly, the coils were observed to
deform slightly when current passed through them due to mag-
netic forces. Instead, at the conclusion of data taking, exten-
sive ﬁeld measurements were made of the magnet in situ. A
measurement apparatus, consisting of a three-dimensional Hall
probe actuated by a system of translation tables, was used to
measure the magnetic ﬁeld vector at over 36,000 positions in
both the left- and right-sector tracking volumes.

This paper presents both the measurement technique and the
subsequent data analysis used to characterize the ﬁeld of the
OLYMPUS magnet. Section 3 describes the measurement ap-
paratus, the measurement procedure, and the techniques used
to establish the Hall probe position. Section 4 describes how
we ﬁt the magnetic ﬁeld data with a numerical ﬁeld model to
allow us to calculate the ﬁeld at positions we did not measure.
Section 5 describes the special interpolation scheme we devel-
oped to facilitate rapid queries of the magnetic ﬁeld. Finally,
Section 6 describes the special modiﬁcations to our ﬁeld model
that were needed in two regions where the model did not per-
form adequately.

2. Coordinate System

This paper makes frequent references to positions and direc-
tions in the standard OLYMPUS coordinate system. In this sys-
tem, the x-axis points left from the beam direction, the y-axis
points up, and the z-axis points in the direction of the beam. The
coordinate origin is taken to be the center of the target. OLYM-
PUS has two sectors of detectors, which lie to the left (x > 0)
and right (x < 0) of the beamline, centered on the y = 0 plane.
Since the magnet has toroidal symmetry, it is sometimes conve-
nient to work with cylindrical coordinates. We use r to refer to
the radius from the z axis and φ to refer to the azimuthal angle
from the xz plane. For example, a point on the positive y axis
lies at φ = 90◦.

3. Field Measurements

The magnetic ﬁeld measurements at OLYMPUS were more
involved than those made during the BLAST experiment, de-
tailed in a previous article [6]. Like at BLAST, preliminary
ﬁeld measurements along the beamline were made to align the
coils during the toroid’s assembly; in addition, a detailed survey
was made after data taking was complete. This was important
because OLYMPUS compared scattering with electrons to scat-
tering with positrons; the magnetic ﬁeld introduces diﬀerences
in trajectories between the two species. Field inaccuracies di-
rectly contribute to the systematic error.

Figure 3: Two 1 m xy tables supported a long xyz table, which could scan 4 m
in the z direction. In this conﬁguration, the apparatus is assembled to measure
the ﬁeld on the x > 0 side of the toroid.

The measurement apparatus was built from a system of trans-
lation tables, a schematic of which is shown in Figure 3. The ap-
paratus was originally built to measure the ﬁeld of the undula-
tor magnets of the FLASH free electron laser at DESY [7]. The
entire apparatus was supported by a pair of two-dimensional
translation stands, which had 1 m of range in the x and y direc-
tions. These stands were moved synchronously and acted as a
single table. This table supported a three-dimensional transla-
tion table with 4 m of range in the z direction and 0.2 m of range
in the x and y directions. This system of translation tables was
used to move a three-dimensional Hall probe at the end of a car-
bon ﬁber rod, held parallel to the x axis. The range of motion in
x and y was extended beyond the 1.2 m range of the translation

2

R1 255mmR3 531.9mm533.4mmR4 538mmR2 430mmCurve Z X R1 -636.3 1288.4 R2 1938.5 1113.4 R3 1491.0 1215.5 R4 491.0 -38.5ZXCenters    [mm]      [mm]rrBeamyxzHall probesurveytarget1 m xy translation tables0.2 m xytranslation table4 m z translation tablerect for these perturbations and recover the true position of the
Hall probe. Every time a new rod was installed on the tables,
a calibration scan was made, in which the reﬂective target was
surveyed at every step in the 4 m z translation. This allowed us
to determine the three-dimensional trajectory of the target. We
found that the trajectories had similar shapes for all rods, and
the motion could be parameterized with:

x(z) =xt(z) + Lr cos (θt(z)) + linear term
y(z) =yt(z) + Lr sin (θt(z)) + linear term,

(1)
(2)

where xt, yt, and θt represent perturbation functions that are
common to the table (independent of which rod was used), and
Lr is the length of the speciﬁc rod in use. A linear term was used
to match the start and end points of the trajectory to the starting
and ending positions of each measurement scan, as surveyed by
the theodolite. Figure 5 shows data from three calibration scans
ﬁt using this parameterization.

tables by using rods of diﬀerent lengths and diﬀerent brackets
to connect the rods to the tables. To allow the Hall probe and
rod to move through the magnet volume without obstructions,
the detectors and parts of the beamline were removed before the
apparatus was assembled.

The position of the Hall probe was monitored using a theodo-
lite equipped with a laser range-ﬁnder. The theodolite could
determine the relative position to a reﬂective target, which was
attached to the measurement rod. The theodolite’s position was
calibrated daily by surveying a set of reference points on the
walls of the experimental hall and on the frame of the magnet,
the positions of which were established by previous surveys.

Measurement scans were made by moving to a desired x and
y position and then stepping along the z direction. At the start-
ing and ending point of a scan, the theodolite was used to sur-
vey the position of the reﬂective target. At each step in the
scan, the probe would be moved to the new z position, followed
by a pause of one second to allow any vibrations in the rod
to dampen. Then, a measurement was made, and the probe
was stepped to the next point. This procedure was computer-
controlled using a LabVIEW application. Measurements were
made in a three-dimensional grid with 50 mm spacing within
1 m of the beamline and 100 mm spacing elsewhere. Mea-
surement scans were made along as many x, y trajectories as
could be reached, given the ranges of the rods and tables, while
still avoiding collisions between the magnet and the measure-
ment apparatus. The nominal probe positions for each scan
are shown in Figure 4. The ﬁeld was measured at over 36,000
points across both sectors.

Figure 5: The translation tables deviated from their nominal positions over the
length of a scan, but these deviations could be ﬁt with a simple parameteriza-
tion.

4. Coil Fitting

The magnetic ﬁeld measurement data were ﬁt using a numer-
ical magnetic ﬁeld model, thereby solving two problems. First,
the model can be used to calculate the magnetic ﬁeld in regions
where measurements could not be made, i.e., where the probe
was obstructed. Secondly, any measurements with errant ﬁeld
readings or oﬀset position assignments have their local inﬂu-
ence dampened in the model.

In the magnetic ﬁeld model, the current in each copper wind-
ing was approximated by a sequence of line segments. The
magnetic ﬁeld produced by a line segment of current was found
by integrating the Biot-Savart law. The magnetic ﬁeld at posi-
tion (cid:126)x produced by a line segment starting at position (cid:126)p1 and
ending at (cid:126)p2, carrying current I, is given by:

(cid:126)B =

µ0I
4π

(cid:126)L · ( ˆV2 − ˆV1)

L2((cid:126)c − (cid:126)x) · ((cid:126)c − (cid:126)x − (cid:126)L/L)

(cid:126)L × ((cid:126)c − (cid:126)x)

(cid:126)c = ((cid:126)p1 + (cid:126)p2)/2

(3)

(4)

Figure 4: Magnetic ﬁeld measurements were made with greater density in the
inner part of the tracking volume where the ﬁeld gradients are highest.

After surveying the left sector, the apparatus was taken apart
and reassembled for measurements of the right sector. The ﬁeld
in the beamline region was measured from both the left and
right. These overlapping measurements were consistent in all
three ﬁeld directions at a level better than 5 × 10−5 T.

Measurements with the theodolite conﬁrmed that the trans-
lation tables did not provide the millimeter-level accuracy de-
sired. Over the course of 4 m of translation in z, the long table
introduced perturbations of several millimeters in x and y. The
position measurements from the theodolite were used to cor-

3

−1000−50005001000−2000−1000010002000y[mm]x[mm]100mm-stepscan50mm-stepscan−4−2024681012−50005001000150020002500300035004000Deviationiny[mm]z[mm]ShortRodDataMediumRodDataLongRodDataShortRodFitMediumRodFitLongRodFit(cid:126)L = (cid:126)p2 − (cid:126)p1
(cid:126)pi − (cid:126)x
ˆVi =
|(cid:126)pi − (cid:126)x| .

(5)

(6)

The OLYMPUS coils have straight sections, easily described
by line segments, and curved sections, in which the curves are
approximately circular arcs. We approximated the arcs in the
model by connecting multiple line segments to form a polygon.
To divide an arc subtending angle α into N segments, one can
place (N + 1) vertices evenly along the arc, and connect them to
form a polygon. However, we found we could better match the
magnetic ﬁeld of the arc by placing the vertices slightly outside
of the arc, so that the polygon and arc had equal area, and thus
equal dipole moments. In our approximation, we chose to start
the ﬁrst segment at the beginning of the arc, and to end the last
segment at the end of the arc to maintain continuity. We dis-
placed the (N − 1) intermediate vertices radially outward from
the arc radius R to R(cid:48), given by:

(cid:115)



 .
(cid:17) − 1
α(N − 2)
sin

(cid:16) α

N

R(cid:48) =

R
N − 2

1 +

(7)

To ﬁt the magnetic ﬁeld model to the measurements, several
parameters were allowed to vary, and a best ﬁt was found by

minimizing the sum of the squared residuals(cid:80)|(cid:126)Bmeas.− (cid:126)Bmodel|2.

Several attempts were made in order to strike a balance between
giving the model suﬃcient freedom to explain the data and in-
troducing degrees of freedom that were unconstrained by the
measurements. Ultimately, a model with 35 free parameters
was chosen. The four coils that immediately surrounded the
measurement region were each given six degrees of freedom
(three for positioning and three for orientation). The remain-
ing four coils were positioned around a common toroid axis
(three parameters to specify the origin and three parameters to
specify the orientation), but were allowed to vary collectively
in radius and in-plane rotation angle. All of the coils were col-
lectively given two degrees of freedom to stretch or compress
in both in-plane directions, since the coils were observed to de-
form slightly when current was passed through them. The ﬁnal
free parameter was the current carried in the magnet, which re-
produced the measured input current to within 0.1%.
In the
ﬁnal ﬁt, arcs were divided into one line segment per degree of
curvature.

(cid:80)|(cid:126)Bmeas. − (cid:126)Bmodel|2 = 1.873 × 10−3 T, where N describes

The model with best-ﬁt parameters had an r.m.s. residual:
1
3N

the total number of measurement points. The residuals were
not uniformly distributed over the measurement region and do
not represent Gaussian errors. Many systematic eﬀects con-
tribute to the residuals, including any errors in determining the
true probe position and inadequacy of the magnetic ﬁeld model.
The magnetic ﬁeld generated by the model with the best ﬁt pa-
rameters is shown in Figure 6.

(cid:113)

5. Interpolation

Figure 6: The magnetic ﬁeld in the y direction is shown for the y = 0 plane.

particle trajectories for the OLYMPUS analysis, and so a fast
interpolation scheme was developed. The coil model was used
to pre-calculate the magnetic ﬁeld vector and its spatial deriva-
tives on a regular 50 mm × 50 mm × 50 mm grid covering the
entire spectrometer volume, so that the ﬁeld could be interpo-
lated between surrounding grid points.

The interpolation scheme had to balance several competing

goals:

• Minimizing the memory needed to store the ﬁeld grid
• Minimizing computation time for ﬁeld queries
• Faithfully reproducing the coil model in both the ﬁeld and

its derivatives.

To achieve this, an optimized tricubic spline interpolation
scheme was developed based on the routine of Lekien and
Marsden [1]. For each point P in the grid, 24 coeﬃcients were
calculated using the coil model (8 per component of the vector
magnetic ﬁeld):

(cid:40)

Ci,P =

Bi,

∂Bi
∂x ,

∂Bi
∂y ,

∂Bi
∂x∂y ,

∂Bi
∂z ,

∂Bi
∂x∂z ,

(cid:41)
∂Bi
∂y∂z ,
∂x∂y∂z
for i ∈ {x, y, z} ,

∂Bi

(8)

using numerical diﬀerentiation to compute the required deriva-
tives from the coil model.

For the interpolation, it is convenient to consider the grid in
terms of boxes deﬁned by eight grid points, as shown in Figure
7, and deﬁne box-fractional coordinates x f , y f , z f ∈ [0, 1] paral-
lel to the global axes spanning each box. Each point in the grid
is labeled with an integer index j, such that stepping from point
P j one unit in x reaches point P j+1. Stepping one unit in y from
point P j reaches P j+nx, where nx is the size of the grid in the
x direction. Stepping from point P j one unit in z reaches point
P j+nxny, where ny is the size of the grid in y direction. Then, a
local tricubic spline can be deﬁned for each ﬁeld component in
the box:

ai,lmnxl

f ym

f zn
f

i ∈ {x, y, z} ,

(9)

3(cid:88)

l,m,n=0

The model calculation described in the previous section was
too slow to be used directly for simulating or reconstructing

Bi(x, y, z) =

4

−2−1.5−1−0.500.511.52x[m]0123z[m]−0.3−0.2−0.100.10.20.3By[T]where the coeﬃcients(cid:8)ai,lmn
parameters (cid:8)Ci,P

(cid:9) are functions of the set of the 64
(cid:9), where P is any of the eight grid points at

the vertices of the box. This function is a 64-term polynomial
for each box and is C1 at the box boundaries. The coeﬃcients
{a} can be computed from the parameters Ci,P following the
prescription in Lekien and Marsden. However, this prescription
requires three 64 × 64 matrix multiplications per box. Once
completed for a given grid box, these multiplications can be
stored for future use, but this adds to the size of the grid in
memory, approaching a factor of 8 for large grids.

Figure 7: A generalized box in the interpolation grid identiﬁed by its lowest-
indexed grid point P j, where nx and ny are the x and y dimensions of the grid
in units of grid points.

To avoid these costs, the spline was refactored so that the pa-
rameters Ci,P can be used directly as coeﬃcients. We introduce
the following basis functions:

f0(xi) = (xi − 1)2 (2xi + 1)

f1(xi) = xi (xi − 1)2
i (3 − 2xi)
f2(xi) = x2
f3(xi) = xi (xi − 1)

(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)

(cid:111)

x f , y f , z f

where i ∈(cid:110)
where each coeﬃcient(cid:8)bi,lmn
correspondence between(cid:8)bi,lmn

Bi(x, y, z) =

3(cid:88)

l,m,n=0

. The interpolation then takes the form:

bi,lmn fl(x f ) fm(y f ) fn(z f )

i ∈ {x, y, z} ,

(14)

(cid:9) is one of the parameters Ci,P. The
(cid:9) and Ci,P is shown in Table 1.

With this interpolation scheme, the procedure for querying
the ﬁeld map consisted of determining the grid box contain-
ing the queried point, computing the box fractional coordinates
of the queried point in that box, and then applying the tricu-
bic spline interpolation for each of the three ﬁeld components
independently. Special care was taken to optimize the speed
and number of arithmetic operations in the routine (e.g., by
pre-computing factors such as the basis functions that are used
repeatedly and by converting division operations to multiplica-
tions whenever possible). Additionally, the coeﬃcients for each

∂Bi
∂z

∂Bi
∂x

∂Bi
∂y

∂Bi
∂x∂z

∂Bi
∂x∂y

∂Bi
Bi
∂y∂z
P j
000 100 010 110 001 101 011
P j+1
200 300 210 310 201 301 211
P j+nx
020 120 030 130 021 121 031
P j+nx+1
220 320 230 330 221 321 231
P j+nxny
002 102 012 112 003 103 013
P j+nxny+1
202 302 212 312 203 303 213
P j+nxny+nx
022 122 032 132 023 123 033
P j+nxny+nx+1 222 322 232 332 223 323 233

∂Bi

∂x∂y∂z
111
311
131
331
113
313
133
333

Table 1: Mapping of the coeﬃcients(cid:8)bi,lmn

(cid:9) (deﬁned in Equation 14) to the

ﬁeld values and derivatives at the grid points contained in the box with lowest-
indexed point P j. Entries in the table are the values of lmn corresponding to
each combination of point and coeﬃcient on the interpolation box.

grid point were arranged in a single array so that, for any box in
the grid, the 192 coeﬃcients associated with the 8 points of the
box occurred in 16 continuous blocks of 12 coeﬃcients, per-
mitting rapid reading of the entire array and facilitating single
instruction, multiple data (SIMD) computing, further increas-
ing the speed of ﬁeld queries.

6. Special Considerations

Simulations revealed two regions where the magnetic ﬁeld
model and interpolation were inadequate. These special cases
are described in the following subsections.

6.1. Field near the coils

Some of the interpolation grid points sat very close to line
segments of current in the ﬁeld model, which was problematic
since the ﬁeld diverged there. The ﬁeld and the ﬁeld deriva-
tives at these grid points were unreliable, and this spoiled the
magnetic ﬁeld over the eight grid boxes surrounding every such
point. When simulating trajectories that pass close to the coils,
we observed that particles had abruptly diﬀerent trajectories if
they entered a spoiled grid box. The instrumented region in
OLYMPUS extends to approximately ±15◦ in azimuth about
the y = 0 plane; aberrant trajectories were observed at an az-
imuth of only 12◦. The problematic points sit near the coils, at
±22.5◦.

To safeguard against this problem, we produced a second
ﬁeld grid using a diﬀerent procedure. We deﬁned a safe region,
±15◦ in azimuth from the y = 0 plane, inside which we trusted
the magnetic ﬁeld model. (Points inside this region were suﬃ-
ciently far from the coils to avoid problems with the diverging
ﬁeld.) For grid points in this region, the ﬁeld and its derivatives
were calculated as before. For points outside this region, we
used an alternative calculation, exploiting the approximate az-
imuthal symmetry of the magnet. For each outside grid point,
we ﬁrst calculated the ﬁeld and its derivatives at the point with
the same z and same r, but on the nearest φ = ±15◦ plane.
Derivatives were calculated in cylindrical coordinates, and any
with respect to φ were set to 0. We then rotated the ﬁeld and
derivative vectors back to the point of interest.

5

For example, given a grid point at φ = 20◦, r = 1 m, z =
2 m, the ﬁeld would ﬁrst be calculated at φ = 15◦, r = 1 m,
z = 2 m. The derivatives d (cid:126)B/dr, d (cid:126)B/dz, and d2 (cid:126)B/drdz would
be calculated numerically. All other derivatives would be set
to 0. The vectors would then be rotated by 5◦ in φ, so as to
correspond appropriately for the grid point at φ = 20◦, r = 1 m,
z = 2 m.

The grid produced using this procedure was interpolated with
the scheme in Section 5. Subsequent tests showed that sim-
ulated trajectories were not aberrant, even out to φ = ±15◦,
the limits of the OLYMPUS instrumented region. Furthermore
these trajectories were essentially the same as those simulated
with the ﬁeld model directly, without interpolation.

6.2. Beamline region

The region near the beamline, where the magnetic ﬁeld was
small, was diﬃcult to reproduce accurately using the coil ﬁtting
model for two reasons. The ﬁrst is that this region is close to
all eight coils. Slight changes in the model’s coil placement can
create large gradients in the region. The second is that there
were few measurements made in that region (and none inside
the volume of the target chamber) to constrain the ﬁt. Møller
and Bhabha tracks pass through this region, and an accurate
simulation is necessary for the Møller/Bhabha luminosity mon-
itor (described by P´erez Benito et al. [8]). Since the magnetic
ﬁeld model failed in this region, a dedicated alternative inter-
polation scheme was developed, for use strictly in this volume.
The region included all points with |x| < 100 mm, |y| < 50 mm,
and 500 mm < z < 3000 mm, shown in Figure 8.
To provide an accurate ﬁeld map for

the forward
Møller/Bhabha scattering region, interpolation was performed
directly on the measured data points in the region. This data
was approximately located on the y = 0 plane with small varia-
tions due to the imperfections of the translation table, described
in Section 4. Since the variation of the ﬁeld in y was very small
in this region (∼10−4 T), the y variation in the grid was ignored
and a Lagrange polynomial interpolation was used on the re-
maining irregular 2D grid to produce a regular 5 mm × 5 mm
grid in x and z for each of the three ﬁeld components in the re-
gion [9]. This regular grid was then appended to the ﬁeld map
and used for interpolation of the ﬁeld in the special region.

During the ﬁeld measurements, it was not feasible to pass
the Hall probe through the walls of the target chamber. Con-
sequently, no measurements were made for points where |x| <
100 mm, |y| < 50 mm, and z < 500 mm. However, a few ﬁeld
measurements were made in 2011, prior to the installation of
the chamber, and these data conﬁrmed that the ﬁeld inside the
chamber is on the order of 10−4 T. In this region, we chose to
use the standard grid interpolation for By and Bz, since the ﬁeld
model reproduces the 2011 measurements well in those direc-
tions. For Bx, a parabolic ﬁt to the 2011 measurements was
chosen for the x dependence, with the assumption that Bx is
independent of y and z.

6

−1 m

0

1 m

2 m

3 m

Target chamber

Downstream beamline

Drift chambers

Møller/Bhabha
calorimeters

x

z

Figure 8: The special beamline ﬁeld region, shown in the shaded box, contained
the entirety of the downstream beam pipe from the target cell to the collimators
of the Møller/Bhabha calorimeters.

7. Conclusions

We have described the measurement procedure and the data
analysis techniques employed to make a comprehensive sur-
vey of the OLYMPUS spectrometer’s magnetic ﬁeld. Using
an apparatus consisting of a Hall probe, actuated with a system
of translation tables, we measured the magnetic ﬁeld at over
36,000 positions in and around the spectrometer volume. We
chose to ﬁt these ﬁeld data with a numerical ﬁeld model to cal-
culate the ﬁeld at arbitrary positions. For analysis applications
that required rapid queries of the magnetic ﬁeld, we precom-
puted the ﬁeld and its derivatives on a grid of positions, and
developed a scheme to interpolate the ﬁeld between grid points
using tricubic splines. By refactoring the splines, we found
that we could reduce the memory needed to store the neces-
sary spline coeﬃcients by a factor of eight. This interpolation
scheme worked well for the majority of the spectrometer vol-
ume; however, two regions—the region close to the coils, and
the region along the beamline—required special adjustments,
which we described. By making these adjustments, we suc-
ceeded in producing a scheme for determining the magnetic
ﬁeld rapidly and accurately. This is crucial for the OLYMPUS
analysis since it allows a high-rate simulation of particle trajec-
tories.

8. Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge Philipp Altmann at DESY for
his assistance in assembling the measurement apparatus and
preparing for the ﬁeld measurements. We are also very thank-
ful for the expertise of Martin Noak at DESY in surveying and
aligning the apparatus.

This work was supported by the Oﬃce of Nuclear Physics
of the U.S. Department of Energy, grant No. DE-FG02-
94ER40818.

References

[1] F. Lekien, J. Marsden, Tricubic interpolation in three dimensions, Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 63 (2005) 455–471.

[2] R. Milner, D. Hasell, M. Kohl, U. Schneekloth, N. Akopov, et al., The
OLYMPUS Experiment, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re-
search Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
Equipment 741 (2014) 1–17.

[3] P. A. Guichon, M. Vanderhaeghen, How to reconcile the Rosenbluth and
the polarization transfer method in the measurement of the proton form-
factors, Phys.Rev.Lett. 91 (2003) 142303.

[4] P. Blunden, W. Melnitchouk, J. Tjon, Two photon exchange and elastic

electron proton scattering, Phys.Rev.Lett. 91 (2003) 142304.

[5] D. Hasell, et al., The BLAST experiment, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A603

(2009) 247–262.

[6] K. A. Dow, T. Botto, A. Goodhue, D. Hasell, D. Loughnan, K. Murphy,
T. P. Smith, V. Ziskin, Magnetic ﬁeld measurements of the BLAST spec-
trometer, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A599 (2009) 146–151.

[7] O. Grimm, N. Morozov, A. Chesnov, Y. Holler, E. Matushevsky, D. Petrov,
J. Rossbach, E. Syresin, M. Yurkov, Magnetic measurements with the
{FLASH} infrared undulator, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ-
ated Equipment 615 (2010) 105 – 113.

[8] R. P´erez Benito, D. Khaneft, C. O’Connor, L. Capozza, J. Diefenbach,
B. Gl¨aser, Y. Ma, F. Maas, D. R. Pi˜neiro, Design and Performance of
a Lead Fluoride Detector as a Luminosity Monitor, arXiv 1602.01702
(2016) physics.ins–det.

[9] P. R. Bevington, D. K. Robinson, Data reduction and error analysis for the

physical sciences; 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 2003.

7

