Reconstructing WIMP properties through an interplay of signal
measurements in direct detection, Fermi-LAT, and CTA searches

for dark matter

Leszek Roszkowski,1,2 Enrico Maria Sessolo,1 Sebastian Trojanowski,1 and Andrew J. Williams1

1 National Centre for Nuclear Research,

Ho˙za 69, 00-681 Warsaw, Poland

2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sheﬃeld,

Sheﬃeld S3 7RH, United Kingdom

L.Roszkowski@sheffield.ac.uk, enrico.sessolo@ncbj.gov.pl,

sebastian.trojanowski@ncbj.gov.pl, andrew.williams.2009@live.rhul.ac.uk

Abstract

We examine the projected ability to reconstruct the mass, scattering, and annihilation cross
section of dark matter in the new generation of large underground detectors, XENON-1T,
SuperCDMS, and DarkSide-G2, in combination with diﬀuse gamma radiation from expected 15
years of data from Fermi-LAT observation of 46 local spiral dwarf galaxies and projected CTA
sensitivity to a signal from the Galactic Center. To this end we consider several benchmark
points spanning a wide range of WIMP mass, diﬀerent annihilation ﬁnal states, and large enough
event rates to warrant detection in one or more experiments. As previously shown, below some
100 GeV only direct detection experiments will in principle be able to reconstruct WIMP mass
well. This may, in case a signal at Fermi-LAT is also detected, additionally help restricting σv
and the allowed decay branching rates. In the intermediate range between some 100 GeV and up
a few hundred GeV, direct and indirect detection experiments can be used in complementarity
to ameliorate the respective determinations, which in individual experiments can at best be
rather poor, thus making the WIMP reconstruction in this mass range very challenging. At
large WIMP mass, ∼ 1 TeV, CTA will have the ability to reconstruct mass, annihilation cross
section, and the allowed decay branching rates to very good precision for the τ +τ− or purely
leptonic ﬁnal state, good for the W +W − case, and rather poor for b¯b. An additional substantial
improvement can potentially be achieved by reducing the systematic uncertainties, increasing
exposure, or by an additional measurement at Fermi-LAT that would help reconstruct the
annihilation cross section and the allowed branching fractions to diﬀerent ﬁnal states.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]

.

O
C
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
1
5
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1

Introduction

In recent years several experiments have progressively put the paradigm of the weakly interactive
massive particle (WIMP) as a cold dark matter (DM) to an increasing test. Currently the strongest
bounds on the spin-independent WIMP-proton scattering cross section, σSI
p , have been achieved
in the Xenon-based underground detector LUX [1, 2] which improved the previous best limit of
XENON100 [3]. For WIMP mass in the range 10 − 100 GeV the limit is about σSI
(cid:46) 10−45 cm2
at the 90% C.L., and it becomes weaker for larger mass. While underground detectors have also
provided bounds on the spin-dependent cross section [4, 5, 6], the strongest limits on the scattering
(cid:46) 10−40 cm2, have been determined indirectly in neutrino telescopes [7, 8,
to the proton, σSD
9]. As for measurements of the present-day DM annihilation cross section times WIMP relative
velocity, σv, which, following the convention used in the literature, we will refer to as simply the
annihilation cross section, the strength of the upper bounds also depends on the WIMP mass.
For mχ < 1 TeV the most stringent limit comes from the Fermi-LAT Collaboration in the 6-year
data from observation of 15 dwarf spheroidal satellite galaxies of the Milky Way (dSphs) [10] while
for mχ ∼> 1 TeV from observation of the Galactic Center (GC) with the air Cherenkov telescope
H.E.S.S. [11].

p

p

With experiment probing deeper and deeper into plausible regions of WIMP cross sections, it
is interesting to investigate to what extent a detection of a genuine WIMP signal in one or more
experiments will allow one to actually reconstruct the WIMP mass and other properties. This issue
will be addressed in the present paper.

The reconstruction abilities in direct detection underground experiments have been extensively
studied [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18], leading to the conclusion that a determination of DM parti-
cle properties from the signal should be achievable only in the relatively low WIMP mass range
mχ ∼< 100 GeV. As regards the reconstruction of the DM properties from indirect detection ex-
periments, studies were performed for Fermi-LAT, in putative data from the GC [19, 20], showing
good accuracy in reconstructed mass below ∼ 200 GeV for large signals. Reconstruction of the
DM properties from a spectral analysis of a putative strong signal in dSphs was performed in [21].
Moreover, in [22] the WIMP mass and annihilation cross section were also reconstructed from the
real Fermi-LAT Galactic Center Excess data, under the assumption that it originates from DM
annihilation.

As regards a complementary use of direct and indirect detection searches for WIMP recon-
struction, an early study was performed in [23] where an interplay between expected XENON100
sensitivity and projected Fermi-LAT data from the GC was investigated at mχ ∼< 50 GeV. More
recent studies of the interplay of the projected sensitivity of XENON-1T [24] and IceCube on re-
construction of the DM properties can be found in [25] and [26] (see also [27] for further studies on
related topics).

p – and will neglect σSD
p

We believe that, with much new available data and forthcoming new experiments, it is now an
opportune time to update and enhance such analyses. For deﬁniteness, in this paper we will focus
on direct detection measurements of σSI
as typically giving a subdominant
signal rate – and on realistic projected measurements at Fermi-LAT and the Cherenkov Telescope
Array (CTA) [28] of the diﬀuse gamma radiation. We will not consider neutrino ﬂux data nor
antimatter (positron, antiproton, antideutron) data, the latter of which are prone to large astro-
physical uncertainties. Finally, we will not in this paper assume any positive information from the
LHC or any future collider, like ILC or FCC. Indeed, detecting in a collider a WIMP-like particle
would not necessarily imply that it actually comprises DM as such a particle could be unstable on
a cosmological time scale.

From the theoretical point of view, increasing attention has recently been given to WIMPs with

2

mass at the 1 TeV scale, which are a prediction of several models. For example, in models with
GUT-uniﬁed supersymmetry, the most statistically signiﬁcant region is an almost pure higgsino
with mχ ∼ 1 TeV uniformly over wide ranges of the parameter space (see, e.g., [29] and references
therein). It emerges in global analyses as a robust solution most naturally implied by primarily
the 125 GeV mass value of the Higgs boson and the correct relic abundance. The ∼ 1 TeV higgsino
features the present-day σv around the “canonical” thermal expectation value of ∼ 10−26 cm3/s, but
is not uncommon to ﬁnd regions of the parameter space where σv can be as high as 2×10−25 cm3/s.
At the same time, because of its very large higgsino component, σSI
is typically in the range of
p
10−46–10−45 cm2. Other models [30], also based on supersymmetry, can feature as the DM particle
a 2–3 TeV wino, which features promising indirect detection prospects (see, e.g., [31]).

The intrinsic characteristics of this type of heavy candidates give reasons for optimism when it
comes to the DM detection prospects in the immediate future. Tonne-scale underground detectors
like LUX, XENON-1T [24] or LZ [32], based on Xe as a target, or even larger detectors based on Ar,
like the proposed DarkSide-G2 [33] should just about cover the above-mentioned expected range for
σSI
p . At the same time, it has been shown in several analyses [34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40], including
one by some of us, that CTA is bound to reach unprecedented sensitivity to σv for WIMPs with a
mass in the TeV regime.

On the other hand, there is also a chance that a discovery will point to a WIMP with mass
much less than a TeV. Indeed, this is what the possible signal excess at the GC that emerged in
Fermi-LAT data a few years ago [41, 42] might be hinting at.1 In that case, some recent studies
have shown that the signal can be ﬁtted by WIMPs whose σv is around the canonical thermal value
and the mass in the range 20–40 GeV (see, e.g., [22, 44]) or 100–200 GeV [44, 45], depending on
the annihilation ﬁnal state. For a WIMP with these characteristics, then, the most likely venue for
discovery is at the moment given by Fermi-LAT. The Collaboration will continue analyzing data
from dSphs, as more of these objects are discovered. In this paper we consider projected data in a
hypothetical 15 year 46 dSphs analysis, which should improve the discovery reach in the low WIMP
mass region.

There are some insurmountable barriers plus several sources of uncertainty that can interfere
with the ability to reconstruct the correct WIMP mass, scattering, or annihilation cross section.
As pertains to direct detection, particularly troubling is the fact that, for mχ ∼> 100 GeV, event
spectra become basically independent of mχ. Additionally there are uncertainties in the density
and velocity distribution of the DM in the galactic halo [46, 47, 48, 49, 50], and uncertainties in the
detectors’ response. For indirect detections based on gamma rays from the GC, in addition to the
above-mentioned uncertainties associated to the halo and its proﬁle [51, 52, 53, 54, 55] there are also
uncertainties in the cosmic-ray ﬂux and in how the molecular clouds aﬀect secondary gamma-ray
emission. For dSphs, uncertainties in the J-factors can play an important role.

Assuming a genuine signal is detected in one or more experiment, direct or in the diﬀuse gamma
ray mode, and given a realistic assessment of the current and future uncertainties, the questions
we want to address in this paper are the following:

• How well can the regions of (mχ, σSI

p ) and (mχ, σv) be determined by direct detection and
gamma ray experiments, respectively, as well as by a complementary use of both to help
disentangle possible degeneracies?

• How well can WIMP mass reconstruction be achieved in the gamma-ray experiments Fermi-

LAT and CTA?

• How well can Fermi-LAT and CTA do in WIMP annihilation ﬁnal state reconstruction?
1However, a non-DM explanation has recently been proposed [43].

3

• What are the challenges and possible obstacles to obtain improved results?
Our strategy will be as follows. We will assume some “true” DM WIMP by specifying its mass
and other properties relevant to the type of measurement under consideration. For instance, in
direct detection we will specify mχ and σSI
p . We will then generate a MC sample of possible other
conﬁgurations which could mimic the signal from the assumed “true” DM WIMP. We emphasize
that in this paper we will not be assuming any particle physics model or scenario. For this reason
we will therefore not be imposing any limits from colliders nor from the relic abundance of dark
matter.

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we review the formalism for generating a mock
signal in several selected direct and indirect detection experiments. We consider diﬀerent nuclear
targets for direct detection, and for indirect detection we consider gamma rays from dSphs and the
GC. We conclude the section by presenting the explicit form of the likelihood functions. In Sec. 3
we describe the selected benchmark points that will generate the signals to ﬁt and the scanning
methodology. We present the reconstruction results in Sec. 4, and we conclude in Sec. 5.

2 Reconstructing a signal
We proceed to deﬁne the mock signals we will be trying to reconstruct to a ∼ 2σ precision. As was
mentioned in Sec. 1, we focus in this paper on the measurements of σSI
p in direct detection search
experiments and of σv and gamma-ray spectra in Fermi-LAT and CTA. We leave an analysis of
other experimental modes to future work.

2.1 Signal in underground detectors

Experiments like XENON, LUX, DarkSide [56], SuperCDMS [57], and other, which are based on
a speciﬁc ﬁducial volume of some target material placed in deep underground and well shielded
detectors, measure the nuclear recoil diﬀerential rate dR/dER of the struck nucleon.
Following several papers [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] which have performed similar analyses we
p , v0, vesc, ρ0},
parametrize the recoil energy in terms of a set of input parameters, {p}DD = {mχ, σSI
where v0 is the circular velocity of the DM halo, vesc is the Galactic escape velocity at the Sun’s
position, and ρ0 is the local DM density. Explicitly one gets

dR
dER

=

σSI
p
2mχµ2
χp

A2F 2

N (ER)G(vmin, vesc) ,

(1)

where µ2
χp is the reduced mass of the WIMP-nucleon system, A is the atomic mass number of the tar-
N (ER) is the nuclear form factor of the target nucleus, and G(vmin, vesc) parametrizes
get nucleus, F 2
the DM velocity distribution in the halo. Here we consider it as given by an integration of a
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, f (v, v0), and neglect the uncertainties associated with deviating
from it [58],

(cid:90)

G(vmin, vesc) = ρ0

d3v .

(2)

The “minimal” velocity, vmin, also depends on the recoil energy ER and atomic mass of the target
mN ,2

.

(3)

vmin<|v|<vesc

f (v, v0)

|v|

(cid:18) ERmN

(cid:19)

µχN

vmin =

1√
2ERmN

2We assume here elastic scattering of DM particles oﬀ nuclei (for a discussion of inelastic scattering see, e.g., [17]

and references therein).

4

Because the experiments are in general well shielded by construction, and the purity of the target
material is very high, we neglect in this paper a very small residual background which is usually
further reduced by applying one or another discrimination method. The eﬀect of the residual
backgrounds on WIMP property reconstruction has been considered in the literature [14, 15].
Note that we also neglect in this paper the limitation arising from the statistical scattering of the
measured event around the real dR/dER [59].
One can obtain information on the input parameters {p}DD by confronting the expected signal
times exposure to the (mock) measured signal. This is done here through a binned likelihood
function that is a product of Poisson distributions independently evaluated in i = 1, ..., NDD energy
bins equally spaced in logarithmic intervals. We choose here logarithmic intervals to overcome
possible bias towards the low recoil energy bins. This can occur when the signal is not very strong,
as the tail of the event distribution becomes indistinguishable from zero in the bins above a certain
cutoﬀ energy, which does not in general coincide with the nominal cutoﬀ energy of the experiment.
In each bin the measured number of events, ni, is compared to the calculated signal, µi({p}DD),

given by

µi = exposure ×

dR
dER

dER .

(cid:90) ER,i
NDD(cid:89)

ER,i−1

i=1

i e−µi
µni
ni!

.

The likelihood function reads

LDD =

(4)

(5)

(7)

2.2 Gamma-ray signals from Dwarf Spheroidal galaxies and the Galactic Center

We will now consider a WIMP discovery in gamma-ray observatories. Because of their highly
reduced backgrounds, the targets most sensitive to observation of DM in the 10–250 GeV range are
the dSphs from the Local Group. To analyze a realistic scenario we consider here the sensitivity
obtained with 15 yr data, from observation of 46 dSphs. We mimic 46 dSphs by modeling the signal
in the presently discovered 23 dSphs, and successively doubling it. Conversely, for DM masses above
250 GeV the highest sensitivity is expected at CTA in observation of the GC.
{mχ, σv, f}, where f parametrizes a set of branching ratios to diﬀerent annihilation ﬁnal states. In
the case of one dSphs, the observed ﬂux reads

The expected diﬀerential ﬂux from WIMP annihilation depends on the input parameters {p}γ-rays =

(cid:18) dΦ

(cid:19)

dE

dSphs

=

σv

8πm2
χ

J

dNγ
dE

,

(6)

where J is the J-factor measured for all dSphs from velocity dispersion relations [60, 61, 62, 63]
and dNγ/dE is the prompt gamma-ray spectrum from WIMP annihilation, which depends on the
annihilation ﬁnal state.

In the case of observation of the GC, one must additionally factor in the large uncertainties of
the halo proﬁle determinations. We do so by assuming a generalized Navarro-Frenk-White (NFW)
proﬁle [52]

(cid:16)
(cid:17)γNFW(cid:16)

1 + R(cid:12)
rs

(cid:17)3−γNFW
(cid:17)3−γNFW

ρ0

1 + r
rs

(cid:16) r

R(cid:12)

ρ(r) =

where we ﬁx the scale radius rs = 20 kpc and the distance of the Solar System from the GC,
R(cid:12) = 8.5 kpc. This introduces two new free input parameters to our analysis: {p}γ-rays =

5

{mχ, σv, f, ρ0, γNFW}. The J-factor for a region of the GC characterized by a solid angle ∆Ω
is given by integrating ρ2(r) along the line of sight in the corresponding angular region,

ρ2[r(θ)]dr(θ)dΩ .

(8)

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

J∆Ω =

∆Ω

l.o.s.

A calculation of the ﬂux from the GC must take into account the prompt spectrum and the
secondary spectrum from inverse Compton (IC) scattering of electrons oﬀ the CMB, starlight, and
IR radiation [64, 39], so that one gets

(cid:18) dΦ

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

=

σv

8πm2
χ

J∆Ω

dNγ
dE

+

1
E2

dE

GC

dEs ¯IIC,∆Ω(E, Es)

dNe±
dEs

,

(9)

where dNe±/dE stands for the electron/positron spectra from WIMP annihilation. The quantity
¯IIC,∆Ω parametrizes the cumulative eﬀect of the diﬀerential IC radiation power per unit of Galactic
coordinates [64], which we here call IIC(Eγ, Es, l, b). It is explicitly given by

(cid:90) mχ

me

(cid:90)

∆l,∆b

¯IIC,∆Ω(Eγ, Es) = 4R(cid:12)ρ2
0

IIC(Eγ, Es, l, b)dldb cos b ,

(10)

where R(cid:12) is the distance of the Sun from the GC and we use for the computation the form of
IIC(Eγ, Es, l, b) provided by [64].

2.2.1 Likelihood function for Fermi-LAT dSphs

We consider a binned likelihood function for the putative data in 46 dSphs at Fermi-LAT.

The gamma-ray ﬂux, Eq. (6), is binned into NFermi = 17 energy bins and then confronted to
the putative observed residual ﬂux. Each diﬀerent dwarf galaxy is labeled by the index j = 1, ..., 46

so that the expected ﬂux in each bin is given by Φij =(cid:82)

dE (dΦj/dE)dSphs .

For each dSphs the corresponding J-factor, ¯Jj, has been computed by the Fermi-LAT Collabo-
ration with a relative logarithmic uncertainty, σj [63]. The expected ﬂux is compared to the mock
observed ﬂux in bin ij, Φij, through the likelihood function

∆Ei

(cid:40)(cid:90)

46(cid:89)

j=1

LdSphs =

√
dJj
log(10) ¯Jj

2πσj

exp

(cid:35)

¯Jj)2

(cid:34)
− (log10 Jj − log10
(cid:32)NFermi(cid:89)

2σ2
j

1√
2πσij

i=1

×

exp

(cid:34)
− (Φij − Φij)2

2σ2
ij

(cid:35)(cid:33)(cid:41)

.

(11)

The uncertainties σij are estimated by generating the total expected ﬂux from the signal, as well
as the isotropic and diﬀuse background [65] for each dwarf galaxy. This is translated into the total
number of expected events for the observation period by convolving with the exposure map and
observation time [66]. The uncertainty in the total number of gamma rays in a given observation
region and energy bin is then taken as the Poisson uncertainty. The error in the residual ﬂux is
calculated as the uncertainty in the total number of gamma rays converted back into a ﬂux by
dividing by the exposure. Note that the uncertainties σij are thus related to the backgrounds in
each dwarf galaxy and each energy bin and therefore also depend on Jj.

6

Figure 1: Our generalization of the Ring Method. Region 1 (beige), is inside the circle of angular
radius ∆ ≤ 1.0◦. Region 2 (light blue) is the angular corona included in 1.00◦ < ∆ ≤ 1.36◦.
Region 3 is marked with light green and Region 4 with salmon pink. The ring’s center is oﬀset
from the GC by boﬀ = 1.42◦. Its inner radius is r1 = 0.55◦ and its outer radius is r2 = 2.88◦. The
strip of the sky at |b| < 0.3◦ (Galactic plane) does not belong to any of the regions.

2.2.2 Likelihood function for CTA

To construct the likelihood function for CTA we use a generalization of the Ring Method based on
four spatial regions or patches in sky.3 The four regions we consider are identiﬁed in the plane of the
Galactic angular coordinates l and b, as shown in Fig. 1. Region 1, in which DM annihilations are
likely to play a more important role than in other places in the sky, is deﬁned as a circle of angular
radius ∆1 = 1.0◦ around the GC. Region 2 covers the angular corona included between ∆1 and
∆2 = 1.36◦. In addition we deﬁne two regions (Regions 3 and 4) where the expected count has only
a minor contribution from the DM signal. Regions 3 and 4 are respectively included in the lower
and upper halves of a ring centred at the oﬀset coordinate boﬀ = 1.42◦. The inner angular region of
radius r1 = 0.55◦ is not considered, whereas the outer radius of the ring including Regions 3 and 4
is r2 = 2.88◦. Regions 1, 2, and 3 belong to the lower half of the ring of outer radius r2 without
overlapping. The strip of sky characterised by |b| < 0.3◦ about the Galactic plane does not belong
to any of the considered regions.

We bin the γ-ray spectra into NCTA = 30 energy bins, i = 1, .., NCTA, logarithmically spaced.
Regions 1 to 4 are labeled with an index j. For each bin, ij, the signal is assumed to be composed
of three parts: the DM signal, µDM
, which originates from WIMP annihilations in the halo; the
isotropic background µCR
from cosmic-ray (CR) showers, which is obtained by detailed MC sim-
ij
ulation and was provided to us by the CTA Collaboration [67]; and the Galactic Diﬀuse Emission
(GDE) background [68, 69, 66], µGDE
, which is obtained from Fermi-LAT data for the energy bins

ij

ij

3The Ring Method is generally based on two spatial regions [34, 35, 36, 37]. We will show in Sec. 4 that, by adding
one region to the traditional two, one improves signiﬁcantly the background reduction, and the results do not then
improve as much by adding additional patches.

7

-3-2-10123-2-1012345l(°)b(°)4321below 500 GeV, and extrapolated with a power law for higher energies, as described, e.g., in [37, 39].

Explicitly, this reads

µDM

ij = tobs

(cid:90)

1(cid:112)2πδ(E)2

dE

(cid:90) mχ

(cid:19)

dE(cid:48) (cid:18) dΦj

dE(cid:48)

∆Ei

30 GeV

Aeﬀ(E(cid:48))e

− (E−E(cid:48))2

2δ(E)2

,

GC

(12)

where Aeﬀ is the eﬀective area of the detector, δ(E) is the energy resolution, and (dΦj/dE)GC is
the gamma-ray ﬂux from WIMP annihilation in the jth region of the sky, deﬁned in Eq. (9). For
Aeﬀ and δ(E) we use recent instrument response functions provided by the CTA Collaboration [67].
The J-factors, Jj, are calculated over each region of the sky.

In order to obtain the total count number per bin µij, which is to be confronted with our

putative signal, nij, the backgrounds must be added to the DM signal,

µij

, RGDE

i

ij + RCR

i µCR

ij + RGDE

i

µGDE

ij

,

(13)

(cid:0)RCR

i

(cid:1) = µDM

where we parametrize the uncertainty in the normalization of the CR and GDE backgrounds with
additional energy bin-dependent factors RCR
. Throughout the paper we assume that the
measured value of the total CR ﬂux and of the GDE at energies < 500 GeV indirectly imply that
RCR
are normally distributed around 1. We adopt conservative uncertainties σCR = 10%
and σGDE = 20%. The CTA likelihood function is thus given by

and RGDE

and RGDE

i

i

i

i

LCTA =

i )2
− (1−RCR

2σ2

CR

dRCR
i e

− (1−RGDE

i
2σ2

GDE

)2

dRGDE

i

e

(cid:90)


(cid:90)

NCTA(cid:89)

i=1

(cid:0)RCR

i

µij

 4(cid:89)

j=1

i

, RGDE
nij!

(cid:1)nij

 .

e−µij(RCR

i

,RGDE

i

)

(14)
Note that, neglecting for a moment the spread in ρ0 and γNFW, a minimum number of three
regions in the sky is necessary to constrain independently the three quantities at the origin of the
ﬂux normalization: σv, RCR
. It has been previously shown in the literature [37] that,
when deriving CTA upper bounds on the DM annihilation cross section, a morphological analysis
that divides the sky in several regions leads to a signiﬁcant increase in sensitivity with respect
to the traditional Ring Method. We will see in Sec. 4 that for reconstructing the DM properties
the greatest improvement is obtained by extending the Ring Method by one region, even in the
case where ρ0 and γNFW are treated as nuisance parameters, and that adding even more patches
introduces a more moderate, incremental improvement.

, and RGDE

i

i

Finally, note that we do not include in this study systematic uncertainties in the CTA detector
response [37], which are to some extent unknown at this point, and further systematic eﬀects that
can be present such as varying acceptance across the ﬁeld of view or uncertainties in the eﬀective
area.

3 Benchmark points and scanning methodology

We engineer eight benchmark points to generate mock signals in the experiments described in
Sec. 2. The benchmark point parameters are summarized in Table 1.

We re-emphasize that our benchmark points do not assume any particular particle theory model.
We thus treat σSI
p , σv, and the ﬁnal state branching ratios as independent parameters that are only
constrained by experiments. Nor do we impose the relic density constrain. Note that although in
several models σSI
p and σv can feature some degree of correlation, this is not always warranted. For
example, in the familiar case of the MSSM σSI
p and σv do not show correlation in global analyses
(see, e.g., [38]).

8

BP1

BP2

BP3

BP4(a, b, c, d)

BP5

mχ
σv
σSI
p

25 GeV

8 × 10−27 cm3/s
2 × 10−46 cm2

100 GeV

2 × 10−26 cm3/s
3 × 10−46 cm2

250 GeV

4 × 10−26 cm3/s
5 × 10−46 cm2

Final state

(hadronic scans)

Final state

(leptonic scan)

b¯b

b¯b

b¯b

1000 GeV

2 × 10−25 cm3/s
2 × 10−45 cm2

(a) b¯b (b) W +W −

(c) τ +τ−

(d) µ+µ−

1000 GeV

3 × 10−26 cm3/s
2 × 10−45 cm2

W +W −

Table 1: Parameters of the 8 benchmark points that ought to be reconstructed through our scanning
procedure. In “hadronic” scans we allow for 4 ﬁnal-state channels such that the branching fractions
sum up to 1: fb¯b + fW +W − + fhh + fτ +τ− = 1. In the “leptonic” scan we allow for 3 ﬁnal-state
channels: fb¯b + fµ+µ− + fτ +τ− = 1.

Given four benchmark masses selected across the WIMP mass range typically considered in the
literature (mχ = 25, 100, 250, 1000 GeV), we choose the benchmark values of σSI
p and σv such that
they can lead to a strong signal in either direct or indirect detection experiments, or both, given
realistic expectations for the projected future sensitivity. At the same time, we make sure these
points are not excluded by the current experimental bounds. In particular, we choose σv to lie on
the published 95% C.L. exclusion line of the most recent analysis that combines the 6 year PASS
8 data for 15 dSphs at Fermi-LAT with observations from the GC at MAGIC [70].

Here we brieﬂy comment on our benchmark points.
• BP1: This is the case of a relatively light WIMP, mχ = 25 GeV, annihilating exclusively
(100% branching ratio) into hadronic products (b¯b ﬁnal state). The strongest sensitivity to
σSI
p in Xenon underground detectors is achieved approximately at this mass, and the current
direct detection bound is σSI
p

(cid:46) 10−45 cm2.

• BP2: A benchmark characterized by mχ = 100 GeV, possibly motivated by models with
rough expectations of EW naturalness. The sensitivity of direct detection experiments cur-
rently implies σSI
p

(cid:46) 2 × 10−45 cm2. The annihilation ﬁnal state is set to 100% b¯b.

• BP3: A benchmark characterized by mχ = 250 GeV, situated at the possible onset of the
Fermi-LAT/CTA interplay for mass and ﬁnal state reconstruction. The annihilation ﬁnal
state is set to 100% b¯b.

• BP4(a): As was mentioned in Sec. 1, a ∼ 1 TeV WIMP is characteristic of many GUT-

constrained models based on supersymmetry with neutralino DM.

Even if we do not make any assumptions on the relic density, it is worth pointing out that
the Fermi-LAT/MAGIC bound [70] for an mχ = 1000 GeV WIMP with 100% b¯b ﬁnal state
reads σv = 2× 10−25 cm3/s. This is a value that is larger than the cross section expected for
a “canonical” thermal candidate. However, it is well known that the present-day annihilation
cross section does not need to coincide with the thermal annihilation cross section in the
early Universe. Examples can be easily found in which the WIMP has the correct relic
abundance but the present-day annihilation cross section is slightly enhanced, for example
by an s-channel resonance with the exchange of a particle with mass ≈ 2mχ = 2 TeV (in the
case of supersymmetry this particle is often the pseudoscalar Higgs).

• BP4(b, c, d): We investigate the ability of CTA to reconstruct annihilation ﬁnal states

diﬀerent from pure b¯b for the same σv.

9

Acceptance Recoil energy range

XENON-1T (Xe)

SCDMS-Snolab

(Ge)

40%

50%

4 − 50 keV
8 − 115 keV

DarkSide-G2

Ref. [56]

(Ar)

38 − 200 keV

Exposure

730 ton days (all BPs)
1150 ton days (BP1)
1100 ton days (BP2)
950 ton days (BP3)
900 ton days (BP4)

− (BP1)

7300 ton days (BP2)
4300 ton days (BP3)
3300 ton days (BP4)

Table 2: The experiments for which we consider a putative signal in direct detection. Exposure has
been adjusted in Ge and Ar experiments to reach a sensitivity to the benchmark points equal to
the one in XENON-1T with 730 ton days. For DarkSide-G2 we consider a recoil-energy dependent
acceptance, see Fig. 6 in Ref. [56].

• BP5: We also consider the case of a 1 TeV WIMP with the canonical thermal σv ≈ 3 ×
10−26 cm3/s and 100% braching ratio to W +W − (typical, again, of some popular supersym-
metric candidates but present also in other models [71]).

For each of the benchmark points we perform a global scan of the parameter space, where
the scans are guided by a global likelihood function composed of the diﬀerent pieces described in
Sec. 2. To each piece there corresponds a diﬀerent experiment: three direct detection experiments
and two gamma-ray telescopes. To make contact with current and realistic or planned experiments
we indicatively select XENON-1T [24] for a Xe target, SuperCDMS-Snolab [72, 73] for a Ge target,
and for Ar the planned experiment DarkSide-G2 [33]. The schematic characteristics of the three
experiments considered here are given in Table 2. In this paper we use units of ton days to quatify
exposure in direct detection experiments. Note that the exposure has been adjusted in Ge and Ar
experiments to reach the sensitivity to the signal generated by the benchmark points equal to the
one in XENON-1T with ∼ 2 years of data. Note that for DarkSide-G2 we consider a recoil-energy
dependent acceptance, which we borrow from Fig. 6 of Ref. [56]. For indirect detection, we consider
signals at Fermi-LAT and CTA, as described in Sec. 2. We consider a default target observation
time of 500 hours for CTA and 15 years 46 dSphs in Fermi-LAT.

The scanning sampling is performed with MultiNest [74]. Recoil energy rates dR/dER are
computed with micrOMEGAs v.4.1.5 [75], while annihilation spectra for gamma-ray ﬂuxes, dΦ/dE,
are obtained using [64, 76, 77]. The uncertainties in Fermi-LAT are calculated as described in
Sec. 2.2.1 with the help of the Fermi Science Tools [66].
In each scan the likelihood functions are multiplied together and a global test statistics is con-
structed, ∆χ2 = −2 log L/Lmax, according to the proﬁle likelihood technique. For 2-dimensional
projections in the input parameters, the 95% C.L. reconstructed regions are given, after proﬁling
along the remaining directions of the parameter space, by ∆χ2 ≤ 5.99. The scanned input param-
eters, their ranges, and their prior distributions are given in Table 3. The nuisance parameters are
ﬁxed at their central values in the benchmark points.

In the case of BP4, to which CTA shows the highest sensitivity, we run two diﬀerent types of
scans. “Hadronic” scan inputs (for ﬁtting to BP4(a)-(c)) use a combination of 4 types of hadronic
spectra, which present similar shapes and normalizations: b¯b, W +W −, hh, and τ +τ−.
In the
“leptonic” scan (BP4(d)) we investigate whether distinguishing between hadronic and leptonic
spectra is easier than distinguishing among 4 diﬀerent hadronic spectra. We thus consider 3 ﬁnal-
state input channels: b¯b, µ+µ−, and τ +τ−.

10

Symbol

mχ
σv
σSI
p

fb¯b
fW W
fhh
fτ τ

flep
fhad
fτ τ

v0
vesc
ρ0

Parameter

WIMP mass

Annihilation cross section

Spin-independent cross section

Hadronic benchmark points
Branching ratio b¯b ﬁnal state

Branching ratio W W ﬁnal state

Branching ratio hh ﬁnal state
Branching ratio τ τ ﬁnal state

Leptonic benchmark point –BP4(d)

Branching ratio leptons
Branching ratio hadrons

Branching ratio τ τ ﬁnal state

Nuisance parameters

Circular velocity
Escape velocity

Local DM density

γNFW

NFW slope parameter

Scan range
10 − 10000 GeV
10−30 − 10−21 cm3/s
10−48 − 10−42 cm2

0 − 1∗
0 − 1
0 − 1
0 − 1

0 − 1∗
0 − 1
0 − 1

Prior distribution

log
log
log

See text
See text
See text
See text

See text
See text
See text

220 ± 20 km/s
544 ± 40 km/s
1.20 ± 0.15

0.3 ± 0.1 GeV/cm3

Gaussian
Gaussian
Gaussian
Gaussian

∗The sum of the branching ratios is 1 and the prior is a modiﬁed Dirichlet distribution (see text).

Table 3: Input parameters in our scans.

In order to avoid introducing any statistical bias towards points characterized by pure ﬁnal
states or, alternatively, by maximal admixtures of diﬀerent ﬁnal states, we modify a prior Dirichlet
distribution for the branching ratios so that eventually all marginal one-dimensional distributions
for the individual branching ratios are close to being uniform. It is important to be aware, however,
that this selection of uniform priors was made to remain as model-independent as possible. Diﬀerent
choices can be made which would eventually aﬀect the DM reconstruction. For example, one
could select priors motivated by Minimal Flavor Violation, which would create a relation between
branching ratios to µ+µ− and e+e−, or by gauge symmetry, which would create a correlation
between W +W − and hh, and so on.

4 Discussion of results

We present here the results of ﬁtting the mock data with the likelihood functions deﬁned in Sec. 2.
In all the plots we show points that are consistent with the mock data in diﬀerent experiments at
the 95% C.L.

To make contact with the existing literature, we ﬁrst re-derive the case of direct detection, which
has been extensively discussed [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. As was mentioned in Sec. 2, for a given
exposure direct detection experiments based on diﬀerent target materials and/or characterized by
diﬀerent detector acceptances will not reach the same sensitivity. We showed in Table 2 that, if one
assumes that a WIMP discovery will be made in a Xenon detector of ∼ 1 ton ﬁducial mass with 2
years of data, it will in general take a longer time or a greater mass to reach the same sensitivity
in detectors based on Ge or Ar. Experiments based on Argon, in particular, need large exposures.
On the other hand, the relative importance of the current astrophysical uncertainties for the
inability to fully reconstruct WIMP mass or cross section in one or another direct detection ex-
periment can only be gauged properly when all experiments reach comparable sensitivity. We thus
make this assumption in what follows. Note that for BP1 in Table 1, characterized by mχ = 25 GeV,
the required exposure in an Argon experiment to be competitive with detectors based on Xe or Ge

11

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 2: (a) Brown triangles show the 95% C.L. ﬁt in the (mχ, σSI
p ) plane to BP1 data in a Xenon
experiment (XENON-1T) with 730 ton days exposure (the benchmark is shown in black). The same
sensitivity can be reached in a Germanium experiment (SuperCDMS-Snolab) with approximately
1150 ton days. The corresponding 95% C.L. region is shown with golden-rod diamonds. (b) The
95% C.L. region ﬁt (brown triangles) to BP2 data in XENON-1T. Fit to data in SuperCDMS-
Snolab is shown with golden-rod diamonds, and the 95% C.L. region in DarkSide-G2, as a proxy
for a generic Argon experiment, is shown with dark gray circles. (c) The 95% C.L. region ﬁt to
a point characterized by σSI
p lower than in BP1 by one order of magnitude. The color code is the
same as in (a). (d) The 95% C.L. region ﬁt to a point characterized by σSI
p lower than in BP2 by
one order of magnitude. The color code is the same as in (b).

becomes much greater than 20 ton years, and for this reason we do not try to reconstruct BP1 in
an Ar experiment.

In Fig. 2(a) we show the 95% C.L. reconstruction of BP1 in the (mχ, σSI

p ) plane. We take

12

XENON-1T as a representative of a Xe experiment and SuperCDMS-Snolab as a proxy for a
Ge experiment. The 95% C.L. regions, shown with brown triangles for Xenon and golden-rod
diamonds for Germanium, overlap when the experiments reach the same sensitivity. The WIMP
mass and scattering cross section can be reconstructed to good precision, in agreement with what
has been shown in the literature (see, e.g., [18]). The residual uncertainties of the mass amount to
approximately a factor 2 and of the cross section to approximately one order of magnitude. They
are due to the uncertainties in the nuisance parameters ρ0, v0, and vesc.

Good reconstruction for WIMP mass and cross section in direct detection is expected as long
as the WIMP mass is not much larger than the mass of the nuclei of the target material. The
experiments lose sensitivity, irrespective of the target material, when mχ becomes greater or equal
to approximately 100 GeV. This is shown in Fig. 2(b), where we present the 95% C.L. reconstruction
of point BP2, characterized by mχ = 100 GeV. Note that we add an Argon experiment to the
lot (dark gray circles), which we model after DarkSide-G2, and which requires an exposure 10
times as large as XENON-1T to reach a comparable sensitivity. However, again one can see that
equivalent sensitivities produce equivalent regions in the (mχ, σSI
p ) plane. We neglect to show
here the reconstructions of the heavier benchmark points, BP3 (250 GeV) and BP4 (1000 GeV) in
Table 1, as the conﬁdence regions look like in Fig. 2(b) despite the points being further up the
reconstructed band.

We remind the reader here that, because of the near absence of background, the reconstruction
quality is strongly aﬀected by the Poisson uncertainties so that increasing exposure plays a pivotal
role in improving the quality of reconstruction. In this regard, one can see in Figs 2(c) and 2(d),
where we show the 95% C.L. regions for points featuring σSI
p exactly one order of magnitude lower
than in BP1 and BP2, that, given the designed exposures, the experiments lose much if not all of
their reconstruction power, even when mχ = 25 GeV.

As reconstructing the properties of the DM particle in direct detection becomes diﬃcult for
WIMPs characterized by mass around and above the electroweak scale, we here proceed to investi-
gate how an indirect detection in one or more of the gamma-ray observatories introduced in Sec. 2
can provide enough information to derive the WIMP properties, or at least improve over a detection
in underground laboratories. While there is no doubt that a real signal should be detected in all the
experiments that are sensitive to the same observables, one can ﬁnd several models of DM that are
likely to produce a strong signal only in direct or indirect detection. For this reason, although the
main purpose of this paper is to investigate the interplay of diﬀerent experimental strategies in case
of concurrent detection, it is also important to quantify how well information can be reconstructed
in each experiment separately.

In Fig. 3(a) we show with dark turquoise circles the 95% C.L. region for Fermi-LAT 15 yr 46
dSphs in the (mχ, σv) plane for BP1. The cross section spread due to the uncertainties described
in Sec. 2.2.1 is about one order of magnitude, whereas the derived uncertainty of the mass recon-
struction is much larger. Note that CTA is not sensitive to a light WIMP signal from the GC, so
that it cannot help improve on the poor mass reconstruction. Given realistic expectations for the
experiments of the near future little more can be said in gamma-ray experiments for this bench-
mark point. Possibly the next generation of anti-proton observatories will be able to provide some
complementarity but this is beyond the scope of this paper.

The mass degeneracy observed in the ﬁt to gamma-ray data is associated with a degeneracy in
the possible ﬁnal state products (we remind the reader that for BP1 we ﬁt to 4 possible ﬁnal states,
all yielding in some large percentage to hadrons, see Sec. 3). The benchmark BP1 is characterized
by 100% b¯b branching ratio. However, Fig. 3(b) shows that the Fermi-LAT mock data can be ﬁtted
to the same precision by tau-dominated cases with mχ ≈ 10 − 15 GeV (dark green triangles), or
by cases with mχ ∼> 100 GeV and admixtures of b¯b (light brown squares) and W +W − (deep-sky

13

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: (a) Dark turquoise circles show the 95% C.L. ﬁt to Fermi-LAT 15 yr 46 dSphs mock BP1
data in the (mχ, σv) plane (the benchmark point is shown in black). Brown triangles show the ﬁt
to the corresponding XENON-1T data with 730 ton days exposure. The 95% C.L. combination of
the two experiments in the (mχ, σv) plane is shown with red squares. (b) The breakdown of the
branching ratios to a particular annihilation ﬁnal state versus the WIMP mass for the points of
the 95% C.L. ﬁt to Fermi-LAT data considered in (a). Light brown squares show the b¯b branching
ratio, dark green triangles the one to τ +τ−, deep-sky blue diamonds the one to W +W −, and blue
upside-down triangles the one to hh.

blue diamonds) or hh (dark blue down-pointing triangles). We will come back to discussing the
degeneracy due to diﬀerent ﬁnal states below.
On the other hand, for large enough σSI

p as to allow for concurrent signatures in direct and
indirect detection the complementarity of these two venues can be used to narrow down the mass
and annihilation ﬁnal state. In Fig. 3(a) we project the 95% C.L. region for XENON-1T (brown
triangles) into the (mχ, σv) plane. The 95% C.L. combined region for Fermi-LAT and XENON-1T
is then shown with red squares. Intersecting the two regions allows one to strongly narrow down
the uncertainties of the mass determination.
Note that if one restricts Fig. 3(b) to the range allowed by the combined Fermi-LAT + XENON-
1T region, 20 GeV (cid:46) mχ (cid:46) 30 GeV, the ﬁnal state options for the surviving parameter space are
drastically limited to only include either the real, pure b¯b, or a b¯b/τ +τ− admixture.
The equivalent ﬁt to Fermi-LAT mock data for BP2 is shown in Fig. 4(a). The signal in gamma
rays constrains the mass to mχ (cid:46) 800 GeV. On the other hand, we have shown in Fig. 2(b) that
a hypothetical concurrent signal in one of the direct detection experiments would constrain the
WIMP mass to mχ ∼> 30 GeV. By projecting, for instance, the Fermi-LAT constrained region to
the (mχ, σSI
p ) plane, one can visualize the combined 95% C.L. mass reconstruction region, whose
lower bound is determined by XENON-1T and upper bound by Fermi-LAT dSphs. We show it
with red squares in Fig. 4(b).

We can use the same technique to pinpoint the mass of BP3, characterized by mχ = 250 GeV.
The BP3 reconstructed region at Fermi-LAT 15 yr 46 dSphs, shown with dark turquoise circles in
Fig. 5(a), presents the same qualitative features as for BP1 and BP2, as expected by construction.

14

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: (a) The 95% C.L. ﬁt to Fermi-LAT 15 yr 46 dSphs mock BP2 data in the (mχ, σv) plane
(the benchmark point is shown in black). (b) The 95% C.L. region ﬁt to BP2 data in XENON-1T
in the (mχ, σSI
p ) plane is shown with brown triangles. Dark turquoise circles show the 95% C.L. ﬁt
to Fermi-LAT 15 yr 46 dSphs data. The 95% C.L. combination of the two experiments in the (mχ,
σSI
p ) plane is shown with red squares.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) Dark turquoise circles show the 95% C.L. ﬁt to Fermi-LAT 15 yr 46 dSphs mock
BP3 data in the (mχ, σv) plane, blue upside-down triangles show the 95% C.L. reconstruction for
the same point in CTA with 500 hours of observation, and the 95% C.L. combination of the two
experiments is shown with red squares. (b) Same as Fig. 4(b) for BP3. Red squares show here the
combination of Fermi-LAT, XENON-1T, and CTA.

15

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: (a) Dark turquoise circles show the 95% C.L. ﬁt in the (mχ, σv) plane to Fermi-LAT
15 yr 46 dSphs mock BP4(a) data (the benchmark is shown in black). Blue upside-down triangles
show the 95% C.L. ﬁt for CTA 500 hours. The 95% C.L. combination of the two results in the (mχ,
σv) plane is shown with red squares. (b) The breakdown of the branching ratios to a particular
annihilation ﬁnal state versus the WIMP mass for the points of the 95% C.L. ﬁt to FermiLAT +
CTA data considered in (a). Light brown squares show the b¯b branching ratio, dark green triangles
the one to τ +τ−, deep-sky blue diamonds the one to W +W −, and blue upside-down triangles the
one to hh.

As was mentioned in Sec. 3, CTA’s sensitivity with approximately 500 hours of observation of
the GC is expected for this mass to start closing in on the sensitivity expected at Fermi-LAT.
In Fig. 5(a) we plot with blue down-pointing triangles the 95% C.L. reconstruction of BP3 in
CTA. One can see that the resulting signal is too weak to provide any meaningful information.
However, a combination of the Fermi-LAT and CTA likelihood functions shows for this point a
slight improvement (red squares) on the mass reconstruction with respect to Fermi-LAT alone.
This is a feature that is bound to become increasingly more pronounced as one considers larger
DM mass.

The combined eﬀect of Fermi-LAT, CTA, and XENON-1T data on the reconstruction of BP3
properties when one considers a concurrent observation in direct and indirect detection experiments
is shown with red squares in Fig. 5(b).

We now move on to the 1000 GeV WIMP case that will allow us to investigate in detail how
the considered uncertainties aﬀect the mass and cross section reconstruction abilities of CTA. In
Fig. 6 we present the case of BP4(a), featuring a 1 TeV WIMP with 100% branching ratio to b¯b
and σv = 2 × 10−25 cm3/s. We show the reconstructed 95% C.L. regions in the (mχ, σv) plane
in Fig. 6(a). Again, dark turquoise circles show the reconstruction in Fermi-LAT, blue triangles
the reconstruction in CTA, whose precision is now much higher than for the previous benchmark
points, and red squares the combined 95% C.L. region. Note how CTA can narrow down the mass
range by almost two orders of magnitude with respect to Fermi-LAT alone, although substaintial
degeneracy among diﬀerent reconstructed values of mχ and σv remains.

Much of this degeneracy is due to the fact that the scan has the freedom to adjust the ﬁnal

16

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: (a) A plot of several diﬀerential gamma-ray ﬂuxes, dNγ/dE × σv/m2
χ, that can ﬁt the
spectrum produced by BP1. The uncertainties around the reconstruction of the benchmark point
spectrum in Fermi-LAT are shown with a light beige band. (b) Several eﬀective gamma-ray ﬂuxes,
dΦ/dE × Aeﬀ, that can ﬁt the spectrum produced by BP4(a) in CTA. The uncertainties around
the reconstruction of the benchmark point spectrum are shown with a light beige band.

state branching fraction of the DM candidate, giving a very similar energy spectrum, so that
diﬀerent options can equally ﬁt in the wiggle room left by the large astrophysical and background
uncertainties described in Sec. 2.2.2. This is shown in Fig. 6(b) where we plot the branching ratios
to the 4 diﬀerent ﬁnal states considered here for the points that belong to the combined CTA +
Fermi-LAT conﬁdence region shown in Fig. 6(a). Interestingly, one can see that the data originating
from a 1 TeV b¯b benchmark point can be equally well ﬁtted by that of a 400 − 500 GeV WIMP
annihilating almost entirely to W +W − with a cross section σv approximately 2 to 5 times smaller
than the benchmark 2 × 10−25 cm3/s.

We pictorially translate the 95% C.L. uncertainty found in the (mχ, σv) plane to an uncertainty
in the gamma-ray ﬂuxes in Fig. 7. Figure 7(a) shows the uncertainties in the reconstruction of BP1
spectra in Fermi-LAT, for the case that was presented in Fig. 3. The uncertainties, which we have
assumed to be given by a combination of the uncertainty of the measurement of dSphs J-factors and
the statistical Poisson uncertainty of the number of gamma-ray events from ﬂuxes, can be shown
as a light beige band allowing diﬀerent shapes for dNγ/dE × σv/m2
χ. The band can for instance
accommodate at the same time the spectra for 13 GeV WIMPs annihilating into τ +τ−, 25 GeV
WIMPs going to b¯b, or 130 GeV WIMPs yielding predominantly W +W −. Note that Fig. 7(a) also
pictorially shows how, for instance, the spectrum of a 75 GeV WIMP with 100% branching ratio
into τ +τ− falls outside of the considered uncertainties, but that one could manage to bring it back
into the allowed band by reducing the branching ratio to τ +τ− and at the same time increasing b¯b,
in agreement with what Fig. 3(b) shows.

In Fig. 7(b) we show the case of BP4(a). The uncertainties of CTA can be translated into a
light beige band about the gamma-ray ﬂux times eﬀective area, where the latter is responsible for
eﬀectively cutting out all signal in the bins with E < 30 GeV. As one can see, the benchmark
point spectrum corresponding to pure b¯b ﬁnal state and mχ = 1 TeV can be mimicked over a wide
range of energies. A ∼ 500 GeV DM particle annihilating into W +W − or, for even lower mχ, a

17

dΝ/dE × 〈σv〉/mχ2   (GeV-3 cm3 s-1)E (GeV)95% CL FermiLATRoszkowski, Sessolo, Trojanowski, Williams (2016)mχ = 25 GeV, bb- (bench. point)mχ = 13 GeV, τ+τ−mχ = 130 GeV, W+W-mχ = 75 GeV, τ+τ−10-3210-3110-3010-2910-2810-2710-26 0.1 1 10 100Aeff × dΦ/dE   (GeV-1 s-1)E (GeV)95% CL CTARoszkowski, Sessolo, Trojanowski, Williams (2016)mχ = 1000 GeV, bb- (bench. point)mχ = 500 GeV, W+W-mχ = 300 GeV, bb- / τ+τ− / W+W- / hh (all 25%)mχ = 300 GeV, τ+τ−10-610-510-410-310-2 10 100 1000(a)

(b)

Figure 8: Same as Fig. 6, but for the benchmark BP4(b).

DM particle annihilating into all four considered ﬁnal states with branching ratios close to 25% can
reproduce the same spectrum as BP4(a).

While the reconstruction in CTA of a point with the pure b¯b ﬁnal state is still lacking in precision
and allows for degeneracies in mass and σv, the same is not necessarily true if the benchmark point
is characterized by a diﬀerent ﬁnal state. We present in Fig. 8(a) the reconstructed conﬁdence
regions for BP4(b), a point characterized by the same mass and σv as BP4(a) but with ﬁnal
state 100% W +W −. Note that our projection of 15 yr 46 dSphs Fermi-LAT data does not show
enough sensitivity to reconstruct a W +W − point with σv = 2× 10−25 cm3/s, so that the 95% C.L.
region (dark turquoise circles) does not provide useful information. However, CTA has a strong
sensitivity to the features of a gamma-ray spectrum originating in a 1 TeV WIMP with 100%
branching fraction to W +W −, especially because of a characteristic spectral “spike” appearing at
about E ≈ mχ, which has its origin in the splitting W ± → W ±γ when E (cid:29) MW (see, e.g., [39]).
The mass reconstruction becomes eventually very precise.
The ﬁnal state can also be reconstructed very precisely for BP4(b), as is shown in Fig. 8(b),
where one can see that the only allowed pure state is W +W − (deep-sky blue diamonds), although
some 50% admixtures, especially with hh (dark blue down-pointing triangles) or b¯b (light brown
squares), are also possible.
An analogous situation is encountered for BP4(c), characterized by a 1 TeV WIMP with 100%
τ +τ− ﬁnal state. The reconstruction is presented in Fig. 9(a). The CTA likelihood is responsi-
ble for the highly precise mass reconstruction, to which correspond an equally precise ﬁnal state
reconstruction, shown in Fig. 9(b).

We next move to the reconstruction of the gamma-ray spectra of purely leptonic origin. Consider
the case of BP4(d), featuring a 1 TeV WIMP with the same σv as the previous benchmark points
and 100% µ+µ+ ﬁnal state. As was described in Sec. 3, we limit the ﬁnal-state channels for this
scan to 3: points are assumed to correspond to leptonic (µ+µ+ ﬁnal state), hadronic (b¯b), or mixed
(τ +τ + and combinations) spectra. The reconstruction in the (mχ, σv) plane is shown in Fig. 10(a)
and the ﬁnal state reconstruction is shown in Fig. 10(b). Again the mass reconstruction is very
good, although the weakness of the signal for the µ+µ+ mode slightly spoils the reconstruction in

18

(a)

(b)

Figure 9: Same as Figs. 6 and 8, but for the benchmark BP4(c).

σv.
Finally, for BP5, characterized by mχ = 1000 GeV, a canonical thermal σv = 3 × 10−26 cm3/s,
and 100% branching ratio to W +W −, we found in our analysis that, with 500 hours of observation,
CTA fairs relatively poorly (albeit better than Fermi-LAT 15 yr 46 dSphs) on the reconstruction
of the WIMP mass or cross section, so that we do not present a plot for this case.

Given the excellent mass reconstruction reached in CTA for most benchmark points, we break

(a)

(b)

Figure 10: (a) Same as Fig. 6(a), but for the benchmark BP4(d).
(b) The breakdown of the
branching ratios to a particular annihilation ﬁnal state versus the WIMP mass for the points of the
95% C.L. combination of FermiLAT and CTA data considered in (a). Light brown squares show
the b¯b branching ratio, dark green triangles the one to τ +τ−, and orchid circles the one to µ+µ−.

19

(a)

(b)

Figure 11: (a) The eﬀect of neglecting the nuisance parameters when ﬁtting for point BP4(a)
in the (mχ, σv) plane. The color code is the same as in Fig. 6(a). (b) The eﬀect of neglecting
the uncertainty in the RCR
parameters in Eq. (13) when ﬁtting for BP4(a), compare
Fig. 6(a).

and RGDE

i

i

down in Fig. 11 the eﬀect of the diﬀerent uncertainties that can spoil it. We are confronted with
uncertainties of several kinds. There are astrophysical uncertainties, due to the unknown shape of
the Galactic DM halo proﬁle, which are included in our scans through the nuisance parameters ρ0
and γNFW. Note that the ranges considered in Table 3 for these parameters do not extend as much
as to include less steep solutions [78, 79] for the halo proﬁle, which are therefore neglected in this
study. We then consider systematic uncertainties due the normalization of the isotropic cosmic-ray
background and to the diﬀuse astrophysical gamma-ray background around the GC, parametrized,
respectively, by the RCR
parameters in Eq. (13). We remind the reader that we have
not included systematic uncertainties in the detector response [37].

and RGDE

i

i

In Fig. 11(a) we show the eﬀect of neglecting the astrophysical uncertainties by setting the
nuisance parameters to their central values when reconstructing BP4(a) in the (mχ, σv) plane.
When comparing to Fig. 6(a) one notices a signiﬁcant improvement in the cross section reconstruc-
tion, not accompanied by an equally signiﬁcant mass reconstruction improvement (the 95% C.L.
region for CTA is indicated with blue upside-down triangles). This is due to the fact that the b¯b
spectrum for a ∼ 1 TeV WIMP and the W +W − spectrum for a ∼ 500 GeV WIMP are very similar,
see Fig. 7(b). Our extension of the Ring Method eﬀectively allows one to somewhat constrain the
degrees of freedom associated with the RCR
parameters in Eq. (13) and, at the same
time, the J-factors are in this scan ﬁxed by construction. The strength of the signal, driven by
σv, is then also strongly constrained, but the remaining ﬁnal state freedom introduces the residual
uncertainty in the mass reconstruction.

and RGDE

i

i

In Fig. 11(b) we show instead the eﬀect of setting RCR

= 1 in Eq. (13), while main-
taining the freedom to scan over the nuisance parameters. One can see the persistence of a small
degeneracy between mχ = 1000 GeV and some points with a smaller mass, characterized by a mixed
ﬁnal-state spectrum mimicking the features of a 1 TeV b¯b case. They main uncertainty however is
now in σv, centered about the benchmark point. It is due to the fact that the signal depends on

i = RGDE

i

20

(a)

(b)

Figure 12: (a) Turquoise circles show the ﬁt to CTA 500 hour mock BP4(a) data when considering
the Ring Method with 2 spatial regions as, e.g., in Ref. [38]. Violet triangles show the ﬁt when
considering 3 regions in the sky, and dark blue upside-down triangles the ﬁt with 4 regions, designed
as in Fig. 1. (b) Same as (a) but for BP4(b).

the product σv/m2

χ × J, whose factors can be adjusted independently to produce a better ﬁt.

As was mentioned in Sec. 2.2.2, our extension of the Ring Method plays an important role in
reducing the background systematic uncertainties in CTA. In this paper we have presented results
based on the 4 regions shown in Fig. 1. However, we also mentioned in Sec. 2.2.2 that what is
really important is to perform the analysis in at least 3 spatial regions, as there are 3 separate
components producing a signal in Eq. (13).

In Fig. 12 we present the 95% C.L. reconstruction regions at CTA for a progressively increasing
number of regions. We show it for BP4(a) in Fig. 12(a) and for BP4(b) in Fig. 12(b). Marked with
turquoise circles, one can see the reconstruction obtained using the traditional 2-region method of,
e.g., [34, 35, 36, 38]. The region in violet triangles shows that most of the improvement can be
obtained by adding one additional region to the Ring Method (3 regions result when Regions 1 and
2 in Fig. 1 are uniﬁed into a single patch). One can also see that adding the fourth region brings
about a moderate additional improvement (dark blue upside-down triangles as in the other plots).
It is important to point out that, as the uncertainties in the background normalization become
increasingly constrained by adding additional regions in the sky, systematic uncertainties of the
detector response, which we do not consider here, can become the dominant source.

We conclude this section by presenting the results of extending the exposure of CTA to 1000
hours of observation, which could be possibly allocated in the optimistic case of a WIMP discovery.
Speciﬁcally, the reconstruction would improve in the case of BP5, a point characterized by the
canonical σv = 3 × 10−26 cm3/s for which the reconstruction with 500 hours was quite poor. One
can see in Fig. 13(a) that even with increased exposure, this case remains tricky and lies at the
borderline of the instrument reconstruction abilities, given the current state of uncertainties. We
show for completeness in Fig. 13(b) the reconstruction with 1000 hours in the case of BP4(a), with
a larger σv. The 95% C.L. combined region shrinks here signiﬁcantly relative to Fig. 6(a).

21

(a)

(b)

Figure 13: (a) Same as Fig. 6(a), but for the benchmark BP5, where the exposure of CTA has been
extended to 1000 hours. (b) Same as (a) but for BP4(a), compare Fig. 6(a).

5 Summary and conclusions

In this work we addressed the issue of WIMP mass and cross section reconstruction in case a
positive measurement of a DM signal is made in either an underground direct detection experiment
or in a diﬀuse gamma radiation experiment, or both. For the former we considered the expected
sensitivity of XENON-1T, SuperCDMS-Snolab, and DarkSide-G2, while for the latter we considered
projected 15 yr data from Fermi-LAT observation of 46 dSphs and projected CTA sensitivity to a
signal from the Galactic Center assuming the default observation time of 500 hours. For each we
built a likelihood function assuming realistic astrophysical uncertainties.

We considered eight WIMP cases (benchmark points) spanning a wide range of mass from
25 GeV up to 1 TeV and featuring σSI
(direct detection) or σv (gamma rays) large enough to be
p
within the discovery reach of the above experiments. For σv we further considered not only a
“default” WIMP annihilation ﬁnal state b¯b but also τ +τ−, W +W −, and µ+µ−. For each case
we generated MC simulations of WIMP parameters producing in diﬀerent experiments a signal
within 2σ of the considered benchmark point. We did not assume any speciﬁc particle physics
model or scenario, and for this reason neither did we impose any collider limits nor the relic density
constraint.

Our general conclusion is that, even in the optimistic cases of cross sections large enough
to warrant a strong signal detection, reconstructing WIMP properties will for the most part be
rather challenging. As previously shown, direct detection experiments will only be able to recon-
struct WIMP mass below some 100 GeV, above which event spectra become basically degenerate.
Gamma-ray energy spectra, on the other hand, are WIMP mass dependent but face another type
of degeneracy related to diﬀerent ﬁnal states at diﬀerent WIMP mass. This can severely limit the
ability of Fermi-LAT, in the low mass regime, and, to a lesser extent, CTA, in the high mass regime,
to determine WIMP mass, σv, or annihilation ﬁnal states, when considered alone.

However, we found that in several interesting cases a remarkable improvement in WIMP re-
construction can be achieved by combining discovery data from Fermi-LAT and/or CTA, or by
combining gamma-ray observatories with direct detection experiments.

22

For example, at lower WIMP mass (c.f. 25 GeV), good mass determination in direct detection
experiments may not only help substantially reduce the range of σv allowed by a positive measure-
ment at Fermi-LAT, but also severely restrict WIMP annihilation ﬁnal states. At the other end
of the considered WIMP mass range (1 TeV), best prospects come from CTA which will reach its
maximum sensitivity there, while Fermi-LAT’s sensitivity will be poorer, but not always negligible.
We showed that in the case of CTA one can engineer a simple extension of the Ring Method that
provides signiﬁcant reduction of the systematic uncertainties in the background normalization with-
out the need of a full morphological analysis. We also quantiﬁed the improvement in the WIMP
property reconstruction associated with increasing the allocated exposure over the default value of
500 hours.
While a signal in CTA would allow for a fairly crude (b¯b ﬁnal state), good (W +W −) or even
very good (τ +τ− and µ+µ−) WIMP mass determination, combining it with an additional signal
from Fermi-LAT may help reducing the range of σv and the allowed branching fractions to diﬀerent
ﬁnal states.

The most diﬃcult mass range appears to be the middle range between some 100 GeV and a few
hundred GeV where direct detection gives a very poor mass determination, Fermi-LAT starts losing
more and more sensitivity with increasing WIMP mass, while that of CTA has not yet reached its
full strength. However, even in this tricky parameter space region we have shown that in case of a
concurrent detection in both a direct detection experiment and Fermi-LAT data, the former can set
a lower bound on the WIMP mass and the latter an upper bound that can be combined together
to give a rough reconstruction of the WIMP mass and scattering cross section.

In conclusion, while a detection of a DM signal will be a landmark achievement whose impor-
tance will be diﬃcult of overemphasize, the determination of WIMP properties from a DM signal
in one or more types of experiment is likely to be very challenging. However, a complementary
approach using multiple experimental venues can, as is often the case, reduce the degeneracy and
provide better information on the DM properties.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Andrzej Hryczuk for helpful comments. The work of LR is supported by
the Lancaster-Manchester-Sheﬃeld Consortium for Fundamental Physics under STFC Grant No.
ST/L000520/1. ST is supported in part by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education,
under research grant 1309/MOB/IV/2015/0. The use of the CIS computer cluster at the National
Centre for Nuclear Research is gratefully acknowledged.

References

[1] LUX Collaboration, D. S. Akerib et al., “First results from the LUX dark matter experi-
ment at the Sanford Underground Research Facility,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 091303,
arXiv:1310.8214 [astro-ph.CO].

[2] LUX Collaboration, D. S. Akerib et al., “Improved WIMP scattering limits from the LUX

experiment,” arXiv:1512.03506 [astro-ph.CO].

[3] XENON100 Collaboration, E. Aprile et al., “Dark Matter Results from 225 Live Days of
XENON100 Data,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 181301, arXiv:1207.5988 [astro-ph.CO].

23

[4] PICO Collaboration, C. Amole et al., “Dark Matter Search Results from the PICO-60 CF3I

Bubble Chamber,” Submitted to: Phys. Rev. D (2015) , arXiv:1510.07754 [hep-ex].

[5] PICO Collaboration, C. Amole et al., “Improved Dark Matter Search Results from PICO-2L

Run-2,” Submitted to: Phys. Rev. D (2016) , arXiv:1601.03729 [astro-ph.CO].

[6] LUX Collaboration, D. S. Akerib et al., “First spin-dependent WIMP-nucleon cross section

limits from the LUX experiment,” arXiv:1602.03489 [hep-ex].

[7] ANTARES Collaboration, S. Adrian-Martinez et al., “First results on dark matter an-
nihilation in the Sun using the ANTARES neutrino telescope,” JCAP 1311 (2013) 032,
arXiv:1302.6516 [astro-ph.HE].

[8] Super-Kamiokande Collaboration, K. Choi et al., “Search for neutrinos from annihilation
of captured low-mass dark matter particles in the sun by super-kamiokande,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
114 (Apr, 2015) 141301. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.141301

[9] IceCube Collaboration, M. G. Aartsen et al., “Improved limits on dark matter annihila-
tion in the Sun with the 79-string IceCube detector and implications for supersymmetry,”
arXiv:1601.00653 [hep-ph].

[10] Fermi-LAT Collaboration, M. Ackermann et al., “Searching for Dark Matter Annihilation
from Milky Way Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies with Six Years of Fermi Large Area Telescope
Data,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 no. 23, (2015) 231301, arXiv:1503.02641 [astro-ph.HE].

[11] HESS Collaboration, A. Abramowski et al., “Search for a Dark Matter annihilation signal from
the Galactic Center halo with H.E.S.S,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 (2011) 161301, arXiv:1103.3266
[astro-ph.HE].

[12] A. M. Green, “Determining the WIMP mass from a single direct detection experiment, a more

detailed study,” JCAP 0807 (2008) 005, arXiv:0805.1704 [hep-ph].

[13] L. E. Strigari and R. Trotta, “Reconstructing WIMP Properties in Direct Detection Experi-
ments Including Galactic Dark Matter Distribution Uncertainties,” JCAP 0911 (2009) 019,
arXiv:0906.5361 [astro-ph.HE]. ; M. Pato, L. Baudis, G. Bertone, R. Ruiz de Austri,
L. E. Strigari, and R. Trotta, “Complementarity of Dark Matter Direct Detection Targets,”
Phys. Rev. D83 (2011) 083505, arXiv:1012.3458 [astro-ph.CO]. ; M. Pato, L. E. Strigari,
R. Trotta, and G. Bertone, “Taming astrophysical bias in direct dark matter searches,” JCAP
1302 (2013) 041, arXiv:1211.7063 [astro-ph.CO].

[14] Y.-T. Chou and C.-L. Shan, “Eﬀects of Residue Background Events in Direct Dark Matter
Detection Experiments on the Determination of the WIMP Mass,” JCAP 1008 (2010) 014,
arXiv:1003.5277 [hep-ph]. ; C.-L. Shan, “Estimating the Spin-Independent WIMP-Nucleon
Coupling from Direct Dark Matter Detection Data,” arXiv:1103.0481 [hep-ph].

[15] C.-L. Shan, “Eﬀects of Residue Background Events

in Direct Dark Matter Detec-
tion Experiments on the Estimation of the Spin-Independent WIMP-Nucleon Coupling,”
arXiv:1103.4049 [hep-ph].

[16] B. J. Kavanagh and A. M. Green, “Improved determination of the WIMP mass from direct
detection data,” Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 065027, arXiv:1207.2039 [astro-ph.CO]. ; B. J.
Kavanagh and A. M. Green, “Model independent determination of the dark matter mass from

24

direct detection experiments,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 no. 3, (2013) 031302, arXiv:1303.6868
[astro-ph.CO].

[17] A. H. G. Peter, V. Gluscevic, A. M. Green, B. J. Kavanagh, and S. K. Lee, “WIMP
physics with ensembles of direct-detection experiments,” Phys. Dark Univ. 5-6 (2014) 45–
74, arXiv:1310.7039 [astro-ph.CO].

[18] J. L. Newstead, T. D. Jacques, L. M. Krauss, J. B. Dent, and F. Ferrer, “Scientiﬁc reach
of multiton-scale dark matter direct detection experiments,” Phys. Rev. D88 no. 7, (2013)
076011, arXiv:1306.3244 [astro-ph.CO].

[19] N. Bernal and S. Palomares-Ruiz, “Constraining Dark Matter Properties with Gamma-
Rays from the Galactic Center with Fermi-LAT,” Nucl. Phys. B857 (2012) 380–410,
arXiv:1006.0477 [astro-ph.HE].

[20] N. Bernal and S. Palomares-Ruiz, “Constraining the Milky Way Dark Matter Density
Proﬁle with Gamma-Rays with Fermi-LAT,” JCAP 1201 (2012) 006, arXiv:1103.2377
[astro-ph.HE].

[21] S. Palomares-Ruiz and J. M. Siegal-Gaskins, “Annihilation vs. Decay: Constraining dark
matter properties from a gamma-ray detection,” JCAP 1007 (2010) 023, arXiv:1003.1142
[astro-ph.CO].

[22] F. Calore, I. Cholis, and C. Weniger, “Background model systematics for the Fermi GeV

excess,” JCAP 1503 (2015) 038, arXiv:1409.0042 [astro-ph.CO].

[23] N. Bernal, A. Goudelis, Y. Mambrini, and C. Munoz, “Determining the WIMP mass using the
complementarity between direct and indirect searches and the ILC,” JCAP 0901 (2009) 046,
arXiv:0804.1976 [hep-ph].

[24] XENON1T Collaboration, E. Aprile, “The XENON1T Dark Matter Search Experiment,”

Springer Proc. Phys. 148 (2013) 93–96, arXiv:1206.6288 [astro-ph.IM].

[25] C. Arina, G. Bertone, and H. Silverwood, “Complementarity of direct and indirect Dark Matter
detection experiments,” Phys. Rev. D88 no. 1, (2013) 013002, arXiv:1304.5119 [hep-ph].

[26] B. J. Kavanagh, M. Fornasa, and A. M. Green, “Probing WIMP particle physics and astro-
physics with direct detection and neutrino telescope data,” Phys. Rev. D91 no. 10, (2015)
103533, arXiv:1410.8051 [astro-ph.CO].

[27] O. Mena, S. Palomares-Ruiz, and S. Pascoli, “Reconstructing WIMP properties with neu-
trino detectors,” Phys. Lett. B664 (2008) 92–96, arXiv:0706.3909 [hep-ph]. ; C.-L. Shan,
“Eﬀects of Residue Background Events in Direct Dark Matter Detection Experiments on the
Determinations of Ratios of WIMP-Nucleon Cross Sections,” arXiv:1104.5305 [hep-ph]. ;
M. Pato, “What can(not) be measured with ton-scale dark matter direct detection experi-
ments,” JCAP 1110 (2011) 035, arXiv:1106.0743 [astro-ph.CO]. ; D. G. Cerdeo et al.,
“Complementarity of dark matter direct detection: the role of bolometric targets,” JCAP
1307 (2013) 028, arXiv:1304.1758 [hep-ph]. [Erratum: JCAP1309,E01(2013)].

[28] B. Acharya, M. Actis, T. Aghajani, G. Agnetta, J. Aguilar, et al., “Introducing the CTA

concept,” Astropart.Phys. 43 (2013) 3–18.

25

[29] L. Roszkowski, E. M. Sessolo, and A. J. Williams, “What next for the CMSSM and the
NUHM: Improved prospects for superpartner and dark matter detection,” JHEP 08 (2014)
067, arXiv:1405.4289 [hep-ph].

[30] L. J. Hall and Y. Nomura,

JHEP 1201 (2012) 082,
arXiv:1111.4519 [hep-ph]. ; A. Arvanitaki, N. Craig, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Villadoro,
“Mini-Split,” JHEP 1302 (2013) 126, arXiv:1210.0555 [hep-ph]. ; L. J. Hall, Y. Nomura,
and S. Shirai, “Spread Supersymmetry with Wino LSP: Gluino and Dark Matter Signals,”
JHEP 1301 (2013) 036, arXiv:1210.2395 [hep-ph].

“Spread Supersymmetry,”

[31] A. Hryczuk, I. Cholis, R. Iengo, M. Tavakoli, and P. Ullio, “Indirect Detection Analysis: Wino

Dark Matter Case Study,” JCAP 1407 (2014) 031, arXiv:1401.6212 [astro-ph.HE].

[32] D. C. Malling et al., “After LUX: The LZ Program,” arXiv:1110.0103 [astro-ph.IM].

[33] DarkSide Collaboration, C. E. Aalseth et al., “The DarkSide Multiton Detector for the Direct

Dark Matter Search,” Adv. High Energy Phys. 2015 (2015) 541362.

[34] CTA Consortium Collaboration, M. Doro et al., “Dark Matter and Fundamental Physics
with the Cherenkov Telescope Array,” Astropart. Phys. 43 (2013) 189–214, arXiv:1208.5356
[astro-ph.IM].

[35] M. Wood, J. Buckley, S. Digel, S. Funk, D. Nieto, and M. A. Sanchez-Conde, “Prospects
for Indirect Detection of Dark Matter with CTA,” in Community Summer Study 2013:
Snowmass on the Mississippi (CSS2013) Minneapolis, MN, USA, July 29-August 6,
2013. 2013. arXiv:1305.0302 [astro-ph.HE]. http://www.slac.stanford.edu/econf/
C1307292/docs/submittedArxivFiles/1305.0302.pdf.

[36] M. Pierre, J. M. Siegal-Gaskins, and P. Scott, “Sensitivity of CTA to dark matter signals from
the Galactic Center,” JCAP 1406 (2014) 024, arXiv:1401.7330 [astro-ph.HE]. [Erratum:
JCAP1410,E01(2014)].

[37] H. Silverwood, C. Weniger, P. Scott, and G. Bertone, “A realistic assessment of the CTA
sensitivity to dark matter annihilation,” JCAP 1503 no. 03, (2015) 055, arXiv:1408.4131
[astro-ph.HE].

[38] L. Roszkowski, E. M. Sessolo, and A. J. Williams, “Prospects for dark matter searches in the

pMSSM,” JHEP 02 (2015) 014, arXiv:1411.5214 [hep-ph].

[39] V. Lefranc, E. Moulin, P. Panci, and J. Silk, “Prospects for Annihilating Dark Matter in the
inner Galactic halo by the Cherenkov Telescope Array,” Phys. Rev. D91 no. 12, (2015) 122003,
arXiv:1502.05064 [astro-ph.HE].

[40] CTA Consortium Collaboration, J. Carr et al., “Prospects for Indirect Dark Matter Searches
with the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA),” in Proceedings, 34th International Cosmic Ray
Conference (ICRC 2015). 2015. arXiv:1508.06128 [astro-ph.HE]. http://inspirehep.
net/record/1389681/files/arXiv:1508.06128.pdf.

[41] L. Goodenough and D. Hooper, “Possible Evidence For Dark Matter Annihilation In The Inner

Milky Way From The Fermi Gamma Ray Space Telescope,” arXiv:0910.2998 [hep-ph].

26

[42] D. Hooper and L. Goodenough, “Dark Matter Annihilation in The Galactic Center As Seen by
the Fermi Gamma Ray Space Telescope,” Phys. Lett. B697 (2011) 412–428, arXiv:1010.2752
[hep-ph].

[43] R. Bartels, S. Krishnamurthy, and C. Weniger, “Strong support for the millisecond pul-
sar origin of the Galactic center GeV excess,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 no. 5, (2016) 051102,
arXiv:1506.05104 [astro-ph.HE].

[44] P. Agrawal, B. Batell, P. J. Fox, and R. Harnik, “WIMPs at the Galactic Center,” JCAP 1505

(2015) 011, arXiv:1411.2592 [hep-ph].

[45] G. Bertone, F. Calore, S. Caron, R. R. de Austri, J. S. Kim, R. Trotta, and C. Weniger,
“Global analysis of the pMSSM in light of the Fermi GeV excess: prospects for the LHC
Run-II and astroparticle experiments,” arXiv:1507.07008 [hep-ph].

[46] M. Vogelsberger, A. Helmi, V. Springel, S. D. M. White, J. Wang, C. S. Frenk, A. Jenkins,
A. D. Ludlow, and J. F. Navarro, “Phase-space structure in the local dark matter distribution
and its signature in direct detection experiments,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 395 (2009)
797–811, arXiv:0812.0362 [astro-ph].

[47] F. S. Ling, E. Nezri, E. Athanassoula, and R. Teyssier, “Dark Matter Direct Detection Signals
inferred from a Cosmological N-body Simulation with Baryons,” JCAP 1002 (2010) 012,
arXiv:0909.2028 [astro-ph.GA].

[48] M. Weber and W. de Boer, “Determination of the local dark matter density in our Galaxy,”

Astron.Astrophys. 509 (Jan., 2010) A25, arXiv:0910.4272 [astro-ph.CO]

[49] R. Catena and P. Ullio, “The local dark matter phase-space density and impact on WIMP

direct detection,” JCAP 1205 (2012) 005, arXiv:1111.3556 [astro-ph.CO].

[50] A. Siebert, “Status and results from the RAVE survey,” in SF2A-2012: Proceedings of the An-
nual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics, S. Boissier, P. de Laverny,
N. Nardetto, R. Samadi, D. Valls-Gabaud, and H. Wozniak, eds., pp. 121–127. Dec., 2012.
arXiv:1210.0363 [astro-ph.GA]

[51] L. Hernquist, “An analytical model for spherical galaxies and bulges,” Astrophys. J. 356 (June,

1990) 359–364

[52] J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. M. White, “The Structure of cold dark matter halos,”

Astrophys. J. 462 (1996) 563–575, arXiv:astro-ph/9508025 [astro-ph].

[53] A. Burkert, “The Structure of dark matter halos in dwarf galaxies,” IAU Symp. 171 (1996)

175, arXiv:astro-ph/9504041 [astro-ph]. [Astrophys. J.447,L25(1995)].

[54] J. Einasto, “Dark Matter,” ArXiv e-prints (Jan., 2009) , arXiv:0901.0632 [astro-ph.CO]

[55] A. W. Graham, D. Merritt, B. Moore, J. Diemand, and B. Terzic, “Empirical models for Dark
Matter Halos. I. Nonparametric Construction of Density Proﬁles and Comparison with Para-
metric Models,” Astron. J. 132 (2006) 2685–2700, arXiv:astro-ph/0509417 [astro-ph].

[56] DarkSide Collaboration, P. Agnes et al., “First Results from the DarkSide-50 Dark Mat-
ter Experiment at Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso,” Phys. Lett. B743 (2015) 456–466,
arXiv:1410.0653 [astro-ph.CO].

27

[57] CDMS-II Collaboration, P. L. Brink et al., “Beyond the CDMS-II dark matter search: Su-

perCDMS,” eConf C041213 (2004) 2529, arXiv:astro-ph/0503583 [astro-ph].

[58] M. Kuhlen, N. Weiner, J. Diemand, P. Madau, B. Moore, D. Potter, J. Stadel, and
M. Zemp, “Dark Matter Direct Detection with Non-Maxwellian Velocity Structure,” JCAP
1002 (2010) 030, arXiv:0912.2358 [astro-ph.GA]. ; C. McCabe, “The Astrophysical Un-
certainties Of Dark Matter Direct Detection Experiments,” Phys. Rev. D82 (2010) 023530,
arXiv:1005.0579 [hep-ph]. ; A. M. Green, “Dependence of direct detection signals on the
WIMP velocity distribution,” JCAP 1010 (2010) 034, arXiv:1009.0916 [astro-ph.CO].

[59] C. Strege, R. Trotta, G. Bertone, A. H. G. Peter, and P. Scott, “Fundamental statistical
limitations of future dark matter direct detection experiments,” Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 023507,
arXiv:1201.3631 [hep-ph].

[60] M. G. Walker, M. Mateo, E. W. Olszewski, J. Pe˜narrubia, N. Wyn Evans, and G. Gilmore,
“A Universal Mass Proﬁle for Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies?,” Astrophys.J. 704 (Oct., 2009)
1274–1287, arXiv:0906.0341 [astro-ph.CO]

[61] J. Wolf, G. D. Martinez, J. S. Bullock, M. Kaplinghat, M. Geha, R. R. Mu˜noz, J. D. Simon,
and F. F. Avedo, “Accurate masses for dispersion-supported galaxies,” Month.Not.R.A.S. 406
(Aug., 2010) 1220–1237, arXiv:0908.2995

[62] G. D. Martinez, “A robust determination of Milky Way satellite properties using hierarchical

mass modelling,” Month.Not.R.A.S. 451 (Aug., 2015) 2524–2535, arXiv:1309.2641

[63] Fermi-LAT Collaboration, M. Ackermann et al., “Dark matter constraints from observations
of 25 Milky Way satellite galaxies with the Fermi Large Area Telescope,” Phys. Rev. D89
(2014) 042001, arXiv:1310.0828 [astro-ph.HE].

[64] M. Cirelli, G. Corcella, A. Hektor, G. Hutsi, M. Kadastik, P. Panci, M. Raidal, F. Sala,
and A. Strumia, “PPPC 4 DM ID: A Poor Particle Physicist Cookbook for Dark Mat-
ter Indirect Detection,” JCAP 1103 (2011) 051, arXiv:1012.4515 [hep-ph]. [Erratum:
JCAP1210,E01(2012)].

[65] http://fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov/ssc/data/access/lat/BackgroundModels.html˚elax

[66] http://fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov/ssc/data/analysis/software

[67] J. Carr, private communication.

[68] M. Ackermann et al., “Fermi-LAT Observations of the Diﬀuse γ-Ray Emission: Implications for
Cosmic Rays and the Interstellar Medium,” Astrophys.J. 750 (May, 2012) 3, arXiv:1202.4039
[astro-ph.HE]

[69] Fermi-LAT Collaboration, M. Ackermann et al., “The spectrum of isotropic diﬀuse gamma-
ray emission between 100 MeV and 820 GeV,” Astrophys. J. 799 (2015) 86, arXiv:1410.3696
[astro-ph.HE].

[70] Fermi-LAT, MAGIC Collaboration, M. L. Ahnen et al., “Limits to dark matter annihila-
tion cross-section from a combined analysis of MAGIC and Fermi-LAT observations of dwarf
satellite galaxies,” JCAP 1602 no. 02, (2016) 039, arXiv:1601.06590 [astro-ph.HE].

28

[71] A. Goudelis, B. Herrmann, and O. Stl, “Dark matter in the Inert Doublet Model after the dis-
covery of a Higgs-like boson at the LHC,” JHEP 09 (2013) 106, arXiv:1303.3010 [hep-ph].

[72] J. Sander et al., “SuperCDMS status from Soudan and plans for SNOLab,” AIP Conf. Proc.

1534 (2012) 129–135.

[73] SuperCDMS Collaboration, P. L. Brink, “Conceptual Design for SuperCDMS SNOLAB,”

J. Low. Temp. Phys. 167 (2012) 1093–1098.

[74] F. Feroz, M. Hobson, and M. Bridges, “MultiNest: an eﬃcient and robust Bayesian inference
tool for cosmology and particle physics,” Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 398 (2009) 1601–1614,
arXiv:0809.3437 [astro-ph].

[75] G. Belanger, F. Boudjema, A. Pukhov, and A. Semenov, “micrOMEGAs 3: A pro-
gram for calculating dark matter observables,” Comput.Phys.Commun. 185 (2014) 960–985,
arXiv:1305.0237 [hep-ph].

[76] P. Ciafaloni, D. Comelli, A. Riotto, F. Sala, A. Strumia, and A. Urbano, “Weak Corrections
are Relevant for Dark Matter Indirect Detection,” JCAP 1103 (2011) 019, arXiv:1009.0224
[hep-ph].

[77] J. Buch, M. Cirelli, G. Giesen, and M. Taoso, “PPPC 4 DM secondary: A Poor Particle
Physicist Cookbook for secondary radiation from Dark Matter,” JCAP 1509 no. 09, (2015)
037, arXiv:1505.01049 [hep-ph].

[78] P. Salucci, A. Lapi, C. Tonini, G. Gentile, I. Yegorova, et al., “The Universal Rotation
Curve of Spiral Galaxies. 2. The Dark Matter Distribution out to the Virial Radius,”
Mon.Not.Roy.Astron.Soc. 378 (2007) 41–47, arXiv:astro-ph/0703115 [ASTRO-PH].

[79] F. Nesti and P. Salucci, “The Dark Matter halo of the Milky Way, AD 2013,” JCAP 1307

(2013) 016, arXiv:1304.5127 [astro-ph.GA].

29

