Ampliﬁcation phenomena of Casimir force ﬂuctuations on close scatterers coupled via

a coherent fermionic ﬂuid

1Dipartimento di Fisica ”E.R. Caianiello”, Universit`a di Salerno, I-84084 Fisciano (SA), Italy

2CNR-SPIN Salerno, I-84084 Fisciano (SA), Italy

F. Romeo1,2

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
2
5
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

(Dated: March 22, 2016)

We study the mechanical actions aﬀecting close scatterers immersed in a coherent fermionic ﬂuid.
Using a scattering ﬁeld theory, we theoretically analyse the single-scatterer and the two-scatterer
case. Concerning the single-scatterer case, we ﬁnd that a net force aﬀects the scatterer dynamics only
in non-equilibrium condition, i.e. imposing the presence of a non-vanishing particle current ﬂowing
through the system. The force ﬂuctuation (variance) is instead not negligible both in equilibrium
and in non-equilibrium conditions. Concerning the two-scatterer case, an attractive ﬂuid-mediated
Casimir force is experienced by the scatterers at small spatial separation, while a decaying attrac-
tive/repulsive behavior as a function of the scatterer separation is found. Furthermore, the Casimir
force ﬂuctuations acting on a given scatterer in close vicinity of the other present an oscillating
behavior reaching a long distance limit comparable to the value of the single-scatterer case. The
relevance of these ﬁndings is discussed in connection with ﬂuctuation phenomena in low-dimensional
nanostructures and cold atoms systems.

PACS numbers: 05.30.Fk, 68.65.-k,73.22.-f,71.10.Pm

I.

INTRODUCTION

When two conducting neutral plates are placed at mi-
crometric distance in a vacuum, a net force between
them arises. This force, ﬁrst theoretically described
by Casimir1,2 and experimentally conﬁrmed by several
experiments3, originates from the boundary conditions
imposed to the virtual photons of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld and it is the direct manifestation of the existence of
the zero-point energy of a quantum ﬁeld. Further studies
have demonstrated that Casimir force can be either at-
tractive or repulsive depending on the geometry of con-
ducting plates4. These studies have received great at-
tention, since Casimir interaction can aﬀect the correct
operativity of nanoelectromechanical systems causing (or
preventing) frictions and adhesion phenomena5.
The original problem of the mediated interaction of two
plates immersed in a virtual photons gas (bosonic ﬂuid)
can be generalized to the case of a fermionic quantum
ﬂuid. Along this line, the problem of the mediated inter-
action between two scattering centers (impurities) im-
mersed in a one dimensional fermionic ﬂuid has been
studied both in interacting6,7 and non-interacting case8.
The interest in these studies comes from the fact that
in particularly clean systems, like one-dimensional ultra-
cold atomic gases, individually trapped atoms, playing
the role of impurities, can be created and controlled9.
Artiﬁcial defects, eventually movable, can be also cre-
ated encapsulating neutral fullerenes in single-wall car-
bon nanotubes10. Alternatively, nanotubes functional-
ization using chemical adsorbates can be performed to
create localized defects whose features can be probed
within a ﬁeld eﬀect transistor setup11. In all these sys-
tems, Casimir interaction is reminiscent of the peculiar-
ities of the quantum ﬂuid which can be probed look-
ing at the impurity dynamics. However, impurities im-

mersed in a quantum ﬂuid are subject to Casimir force
and its ﬂuctuations, the latter being produced by the
quantum nature of the ﬂuid-mediated interaction. Fluc-
tuations of Casimir force have received limited attention
in literature12 and further eﬀorts are needed in this di-
rection.
To ﬁll this vacancy, in this work, we formulate a scatter-
ing ﬁeld theory of the mechanical actions experienced by
scattering centers immersed in a coherent fermionic ﬂuid.
Non-equilibrium, non-perturbative scattering eﬀects, de-
coherence, interaction with boundaries, Casimir-like in-
teraction and its ﬂuctuations can be studied within the
proposed theoretical framework. We provide a compre-
hensive treatment of ﬂuid-mediated forces coming from
a quantum ﬂuid conﬁned in one dimension, while many-
body interaction eﬀects are not included in the theory.
Due to the structure of the theory, divergence prob-
lems sometimes aﬀecting alternative formulations are not
present in our approach. As a relevant results of the the-
ory, we show that force ﬂuctuations on close scatterers
immersed in a coherent ﬂuid are correlated by Casimir
interaction. We discuss this ﬁnding in connection with
ﬂuctuation phenomena in solids.
The organization of the paper is the following. In Sec. II
we present the mechanical actions on a scatterer im-
mersed in a quantum liquid with special emphasis on the
momentum transfer equation. The force operator and the
force ﬂuctuation operator are also introduced. In Sec. III
observables are derived within the scattering ﬁeld theory.
In particular, in Sec. III A, we derive the force acting on a
single impurity under equilibrium and out-of-equilibrium
conditions. We also derive the equilibrium force ﬂuctu-
ations acting on the scatterer. In Sec. III B we present
the two-scatterer case deriving the Casimir-like force and
its ﬂuctuation. The role of decoherence is also discussed.
Conclusions are given in Sec. IV. The S- and T-matrix of

a Dirac delta potential, the thermal averages of the scat-
tering ﬁelds, the T-matrix model of random dephasing
and the M-matrix derivation are reported in the appen-
dices A, B, D, C, respectively.

II. MECHANICAL ACTIONS ON A

SCATTERER IMMERSED IN A COHERENT

FERMIONIC FLUID

We consider a coherent fermionic ﬂuid conﬁned to one
dimension and described by the second quantization ﬁeld
ˆΨ(x) whose evolution is determined by the Hamiltonian:

ˆH0 =Z dx ˆΨ†(x)h−

2∂2
x

2m i ˆΨ(x),

(1)

where we disregard the spin degree of freedom which is
unessential for our purposes. When an impurity is intro-
duced in the system, the particle density is perturbed by
the scatterer potential V (x) and thus the additional term

ˆHI = R dx ˆΨ†(x)V (x) ˆΨ(x) is added to the unperturbed
ﬂuid Hamiltonian ˆH0, being the total Hamiltonian ˆH =
ˆH0 + ˆHI . The Heisenberg equation of motion of the ﬁeld
i∂t ˆΨ(x) = [ ˆΨ(x), ˆH], complemented by the
ˆΨ(x), i.e.
fermionic anticommutation relations { ˆΨ(x), ˆΨ†(x′)} =
δ(x − x′) and { ˆΨ(x), ˆΨ(x′)} = { ˆΨ†(x), ˆΨ†(x′)} = 0,
completely determines the space/time evolution of the
fermionic ﬁeld according to the Schr¨odinger-like equa-
tion:

i∂t ˆΨ(x) = −

2∂2
x
2m

ˆΨ(x) + V (x) ˆΨ(x).

(2)

In order to characterize the mechanical interactions be-
tween the ﬂuid and the scatterer we need to study the
momentum transfer equation. To this end, let us intro-
duce the momentum density operator ˆρP which is deﬁned
in terms of fermionic ﬁeld as follows:

ˆρP = −

i

2h ˆΨ†(x)∂x ˆΨ(x) − ∂x ˆΨ†(x) ˆΨ(x)i.

(3)

From a classical viewpoint, the linear momentum of the
center of mass of a mechanical system is not conserved
in the presence of a net force. According to this ob-
servation, in general, the momentum density balance of
the quantum ﬂuid cannot be expressed in the form of a
continuity equation and sink/source terms are expected.
This expectation is easily veriﬁed by direct computation
of the time derivative of ˆρP which leads to the following
momentum density balance equation13,14:

∂t ˆρP + ∂x ˆJP = − ˆΨ†(x)∂xV (x) ˆΨ(x),

(4)

where we have introduced the momentum current density
operator:

2

i.e.

r.h.s.

of Equation (4),

ˆf (x) =
The
− ˆΨ†(x)∂xV (x) ˆΨ(x), represents the force density oper-
ator (sink/source term) responsible for a momentum
transfer from the potential V (x) to the coherent ﬂuid.
An opposite mechanical action is exerted by the ﬂuid on
the scatterer. The force operator ˆF related to the ﬂuid
pressure acting on the scatterer (originating the potential
V (x)) can be computed as:

ˆF = ZΩ
= ZΩ

dx(− ˆf (x))
dx ˆΨ†(x)∂xV (x) ˆΨ(x),

(6)

where the integration domain is restricted to a subset Ω
of the real axis centered at the scatterer position ¯x and
fulﬁlling the requirement ∂xV (x) 6= 0.
In the following we specialize our treatment to describe
rectangular potentials which represent a convenient ap-
proximation of a local impurity potential. For the rect-
angular potential V (x) = U θ(x − x1)θ(x2 − x) (x2 > x1
and θ(x) the Heaviside step function) centered at ¯x =
(x1 + x2)/2 we obtain

∂xV (x) = U δ(x − x1) − U δ(x − x2),

(7)

with δ(x) the Dirac delta function. Thus, using Eq. (6)
and Eq. (7) with the integration domain Ω ≡ [x1, x2], the
force operator ˆF can be presented in the following simple
form:

ˆF = Uh ˆΨ†(x1) ˆΨ(x1) − ˆΨ†(x2) ˆΨ(x2)i,

(8)

while its expectation value h ˆFi has to be evaluated per-
forming a quantum statistical average accounting for the
occupation of the relevant degrees of freedom.
The quantum nature of the fermionic ﬂuid allows force
ﬂuctuations which can be evaluated introducing the force
ﬂuctuation operator δ ˆF (t) = ˆF (t)−h ˆFi, whose quantum
average is a vanishing quantity by construction. The time
correlation of the force ﬂuctuation δ ˆF (t) can be studied
introducing the noise correlator:

(9)

K(t, t′) =

1
2h{δ ˆF (t), δ ˆF (t′)}i,
the symmetrized version of

which is
the quantity
hδ ˆF (t)δ ˆF (t′)i = h ˆF (t) ˆF (t′)i − h ˆFi2. Finally the noise
spectral density K(Ω) can be obtained as

K(Ω) =Z dτ K(t + τ, t) exp(iΩτ ).

(10)

III. FORCE AND FORCE FLUCTUATIONS

WITHIN THE SCATTERING FIELD THEORY

ˆJP =

2

4mn2∂x ˆΨ†(x)∂x ˆΨ(x) − ˆΨ†(x)∂2
ˆΨ†(x) ˆΨ(x)o.
− ∂2

x

x

ˆΨ(x)

(5)

We have introduced the force operator ˆF and the force
ﬂuctuation operator δ ˆF (t) in second quantization. How-
ever, the characterization of the system properties re-
quires the computation of expectation values such as h ˆFi

or hδ ˆF (t)δ ˆF (t′)i. Hereafter, we develop a scattering ﬁeld
theory `a la B¨uttiker15 which allows the computation of
the net force acting on a scatterer and the force ﬂuctua-
tions under equilibrium and non-equilibrium conditions.
Two cases are analyzed: (i) the single-scatterer case in
which the fermionic ﬂuid is perturbed by only one im-
purity; (ii) the two-scatterer case in which the ﬂuid is
aﬀected by the simultaneous perturbation originated by
two scattering centers.

A. Single-scatterer case

FIG. 1: (color online) Rectangular potential V (x) centered at
¯x = (x1 + x2)/2. Incoming (ai) and outgoing (bi) scattering
operators are used to decompose the fermionic ﬁeld ˆΨ(x) on
the left (x < x1, i = 1) and on the right (x > x2, i = 2) side
of the scatterer.

Let us consider the mechanical actions exerted by the
fermionic ﬂuid on a single scatterer (see Fig. 1). The
fermionic ﬁeld ˆΨ(x, t) can be decomposed using the scat-
tering ﬁeld operators ˆai(E) and ˆbi(E). In particular the
annihilation operator ˆai(E) destroys an incoming parti-
cle having energy E generated in the ith lead and moving
towards the scattering center, while ˆbi(E) is the annihi-
lation operator of an outgoing processes going from the
scattering center towards the ith lead. In the scattering
language the lead 1 represents the region on the left side
of the scatterer (x < x1), while the lead 2 is located on
the right side of the scattering center (x > x2). Thus,
the scattering ﬁelds ˆΨi(x, t) describing the ﬂuid on the
left or right side of the scatterer are written as





[ˆa1(E)eikE x + ˆb1(E)e−ikE x]

ˆΨ1(x, t) =Z dEe−i Et
phv(E)
ˆΨ2(x, t) =Z dEe−i Et
phv(E)
where we have introduced the group velocity v(E) =
kE/m and the wavevector kE = √2mE/ of the scat-
tering modes. The incoming and the outgoing anni-
hilation operators are related by the unitary scatter-
ing matrix Sij(E) according to the relation ˆbi(E) =

[ˆa2(E)e−ikE x + ˆb2(E)eikE x],(11)

Pj Sij (E)ˆaj(E), while the lead correlation functions are

3

completely determined by the quantum statistical aver-
age hˆa†
i (E)ˆaj (E′)i = δijδ(E − E′)fi(E). The Fermi dis-
tribution fi(E) deﬁnes the thermodynamic occupation of
a quantum state of energy E in the ith lead by means of
a local electrochemical potential µi and a local eﬀective
temperature Ti. Within the scattering ﬁeld formalism
the expectation value h ˆFi is computed as
h ˆFi = Uhh ˆΨ†

2(x2) ˆΨ2(x2)ii.

1(x1) ˆΨ1(x1)i − h ˆΨ†

(12)

Equation (12) can be explicitly evaluated in terms of the
reﬂection probability of the (rectangular) scatterer po-
tential |r(E)|2 = |S11(E)|2 = |S22(E)|2 according to the
following expression:

h ˆFi =

2U

h Z

dE
v(E)|r(E)|2(f1(E) − f2(E)).

(13)

where fi(E) is the Fermi distribution of the ith lead.
Equation (13) shows that under equilibrium condition
(f1(E) = f2(E)) or for reﬂectionless scattering potentials
(|r(E)| = 0) no net force is applied on the scatterer. On
the other hand, assuming a weak voltage bias deﬁned
by the electrochemical potentials µi = µ − (−)i+1|e|Vb/2
(i ∈ {1, 2}) and low temperature, i.e. T1 = T2 = T ≈ 0,
one obtains the following linear response result16:

h ˆFi = − |e|U

πvF |r(E = µ)|2Vb,

(14)

where −|e| represents the electron charge, vF is the Fermi
velocity, while µ ≈ mv2
F /2 is the equilibrium chemical
potential of the system. The non-equilibrium force given
in Eq. (14) represents the pressure exerted by the elec-
tron wind generated by the voltage bias Vb and provides
a positive force on the scatterer when the applied voltage
is negative. An expression similar to Eq. (14) can be de-
rived under the assumption of a thermal gradient applied
to the ﬂuid (T1 6= T2) showing that a thermal imbalance
originates mechanical stress on the scattering center.
Since we are interested in describing ultralocal poten-
tials V (x) originated, for instance, by reticular defects in
a solid, we now specialize our result (Eq. (14)) to the case
of very small barrier width x2 − x1. Under this condition
the original rectangular potential can be approximated
by the Dirac delta potential V (x) = 2aU δ(x − ¯x), with
2a = x2 − x1 and ¯x = (x1 + x2)/2. Here the local ap-
proximation of the original potential is designed to meet
the conditionR x2
dxV (x) = 2aU , which is also respected
by the original potential. Under these assumptions, the
force expectation value h ˆFi given in Eq. (12) has to be
computed taking the limit x1, x2 → ¯x, being the limit
well deﬁned within the scattering approach. Thus the
force acting on an ultralocal potential can be written in
the simple form:

x1

h ˆFi ≈ − |e|Vb

πvF

U 3

U 2 + ( vF

2a )2

,

(15)

where we used the scattering matrix derived in appendix
A. In solid state systems the non-equilibrium force due
to the electron wind on the barrier can be compensated
by elastic deformations of the lattice determining a new
equilibrium position of the impurity site. On the other
hand, if h ˆFi is strong enough to overcome the lattice
forces, the impurity electromigration phenomenon occurs
consisting in a permanent damaging of the lattice.
We now analyse the force ﬂuctuation acting on the impu-
rity potential in the absence of a net force, i.e. assuming
an equilibrium condition (Vb = 0). Since we are inter-
ested in the steady-state behavior we focus our attention
on the low-frequency part of the force ﬂuctuation spec-
trum. To this end, we have to compute the quantity:

K0 = lim

Ω→0Z d(t − t′) exp(iΩ(t − t′))hδ ˆF (t)δ ˆF (t′)i. (16)

Hereafter we outline the analytical derivation of the
quantity K0 within the scattering ﬁeld theory. Starting
from Equation (12) (under the assumption of ultralocal
potential) and using the scattering ﬁelds, the force oper-
ator ˆF (t) can be written in the form:
ˆF(t) =Z dEdE′ei (E−E′)

Γij(E, E′)ˆa†

i (E)ˆaj (E′),

integration

(17)
kernel
=
where
U [Λ(1)
is related to the scat-
tering matrix of the local potential through the auxiliary
functions:

ij (E, E′) − Λ(2)

ij (E, E′)]

Γij (E, E′)

tXij

the



4

FIG. 2:
(color online) Two-scatterer potential V (x) =
2aU1δ(x − ¯x1) + 2aU2δ(x − ¯x2). Incoming (ai) and outgoing
(bi) scattering operators are used to decompose the fermionic
ﬁeld ˆΨ(x) on the left (x < ¯x1, i = 1) and on the right (x > ¯x2,
i = 2) side of the two-scatterer system. Middle scattering op-
erators α and β are used to describe the ﬂuid conﬁned between
the two scatterers. The presence of a system edge in x = ¯x2
can be studied considering the limit U2 → ∞ and restricting
the analysis to x < ¯x2.

reﬂection probability (computed at the Fermi energy EF )

|r(E = EF )|2 =

U 2

U 2 + ( vF

2a )2

(21)

of the local potential V (x). From a physical viewpoint,
the force ﬂuctuations described by K0 are originated by
thermal activated density ﬂuctuations at the left and
right side of the impurity site, determining a stochastic
pressure imbalance on the barrier.

Λ(l)

ij (E, E′) =

.

(18)

B. Two-scatterer case

δilδjl + S∗

li(E)Slj (E′)

hpv(E)v(E′)

Furthermore, the force expectation value h ˆFi computed
using Equation (17) leads to the same expression given
in Equation (13). Once the quantity h ˆF (t) ˆF (t′)i has
been written in terms of expectation values of the form
hˆa†
(E3)ˆal4(E4)i, using the Wick’s theo-
rem (see appendix B for details) and performing the
Fourier transform we get the ﬁnal expression:

(E1)ˆal2(E2)ˆa†
l3

l1

K0 =

EF

πδ2 Z ∞

vm
vF

dξ

4α4ξ−1
ξ2 + α2

1

1 + cosh( 1−ξ2

τ

,

)

(19)

where we have introduced the dimensionless temperature
τ = kBT /EF , an eﬀective barrier width δ = 2a, the
dimensionless barrier strength α = U δ/(vF ) and the
dimensionless particle velocity ξ measured with respect
to the Fermi velocity vF . At low temperature the integral
expression given in Equation (19) is well approximated
by the following formula:

K0 ≈

8kBT
hv2
F

U 4

U 2 + ( vF

2a )2

,

(20)

where K0 is measured in units of N 2/Hz. Interestingly,
both h ˆFi and K0 present a linear dependence on the

In the following we study the two-scatterer problem
under the assumption of ultralocal potentials explained
before. The single particle potential produced by the
scatterers located at x = ¯x1 and x = ¯x2, respectively, is
thus given by V (x) = 2aU1δ(x − ¯x1) + 2aU2δ(x − ¯x2).
Diﬀerent barrier strengths U1,2 are allowed in the model
(see Fig. 2). Our purpose is to study the force expec-
tation value and its ﬂuctuation acting on the scatterer
located in ¯x1 in the presence of a second distant scat-
terer located in ¯x2.

To this end, we deﬁne the scattering ﬁelds ˆΨ1(x, t),
ˆΨm(x, t) and ˆΨ2(x, t) describing fermions within the re-
gions x < ¯x1, ¯x1 < x < ¯x2 and x > ¯x2, respectively,



ˆΨ1(x, t) =Z dEe−i Et
phv(E)
ˆΨm(x, t) =Z dEe−i Et
phv(E)
ˆΨ2(x, t) =Z dEe−i Et
phv(E)





[ˆa1(E)eikE x + ˆb1(E)e−ikE x]

[ˆα(E)eikE x + ˆβ(E)e−ikE x]

[ˆa2(E)e−ikE x + ˆb2(E)eikE x].

Here the scattering matrix Sij(E) of the two-impurity
system is employed to write the relation ˆbi(E) =

Pj Sij (E)ˆaj(E), while the dependence of the inner mode

operators ˆα(E) and ˆβ(E) on ˆai(E) can be expressed in
the form:

ˆa2(E)(cid:19) ,
ˆβ(E)(cid:19) = M(E)(cid:18) ˆa1(E)
(cid:18) ˆα(E)

(22)

where the explicit form of M(E) is given in Appendix C.
The operators ˆFi related with the force acting on the
ith scatterer can be written in terms of the scattering
ﬁelds ˆΨ1,m,2(x, t), complemented by Eq. (22), as speciﬁed
below:

ˆF1 = U1h ˆΨ†
ˆF2 = U2h ˆΨ†

1(¯x1) ˆΨ1(¯x1) − ˆΨ†
m(¯x2) ˆΨm(¯x2) − ˆΨ†

m(¯x1) ˆΨm(¯x1)i
2(¯x2) ˆΨ2(¯x2)i,

(23)

while we have to characterize the force expectation value
h ˆF1i and its low-frequency ﬂuctuation expressed via
K (1)
0 .
As a preliminary task we present a qualitative descrip-
tion of the non-equilibrium force h ˆFii acting on the ith
scatterer for a symmetric (U1 = U2 = U ) system. Pro-
ceeding as described for the single scatterer case (Sec.
III A), we get the following result (i ∈ {1, 2})
dE
v(E)|r(E)|2(f1(E) − f2(E)) +

U

(24)

dE
v(E)

[|M1j(E)|2 + |M2j(E)|2 − 1]fj(E),

h Z
h ˆFii =
h Xj Z
+(−)i U

where the ﬁrst term represents the non-equilibrium force
exerted by the electron wind on the ith scatterer, while
the second term is a non-equilibrium Casimir-like force
contribution. Diﬀerently from the ﬁrst term, the Casimir
force provides a non-vanishing contribution also under
equilibrium condition (i.e. f1(E) = f2(E)). Moreover

the total forcePih ˆFii acting on the two-impurity system
presents the same form of Equation (13), with |r(E)|2 the
reﬂection probability of the system containing two scat-
terers.
Under equilibrium condition, the two scatterers are
only aﬀected by the mechanical action provided by the
Casimir force.
In the following we characterize the
Casimir force by studying h ˆF1i under equilibrium also
considering asymmetric systems (U1 6= U2). Under these
assumptions h ˆF1i can be written as:
h ˆF1i =

[1 − |M1j(E)|2 − |M2j(E)|2]f (E),

dE
v(E)

U1

h Xj Z

where the information on the impurity distance17 d =
¯x2 − ¯x1 and on the barrier strengths, namely U1 and U2,
is encoded within the M-matrix elements Mij(E).
Hereafter, we provide a numerical study of the Casimir
force adopting dimensionless barrier strengths αi =
2aUi/(vF ), dimensionless impurity distance kF d and

5

measuring the Casimir force in units of EF /(2πa). For a
typical nanostructured system, we assume m = 0.1 × m0
(m0, being the bare electron mass), vF = 106m/s,
a = 0.1 nm, and thus the force unit EF /(2πa) is about
72.5 pN, which represents an intense interaction on the
In Fig. 3 we study the Casimir force h ˆF1i
nanoscale.
acting on the scatterer located in ¯x1 as a function of
the normalized scatterer distance kF d (d = ¯x2 − ¯x1).
The numerical analysis shows that the Casimir force is
weakly aﬀected by temperature provided that kBT /EF ≈
10−3 ÷ 10−2 (low-temperature limit) and thus we con-
sider the zero-temperature limit. In Fig. 3 a system made
of two identical impurities with dimensionless scattering
strength α1 = α2 = α is considered. The bottom curve
is obtained ﬁxing α = 0.15, middle and top curves are
obtained ﬁxing α = 0.2 and α = 0.3, respectively. The
Casimir force acting on the ﬁrst barrier presents an at-
tractive character at short distance kF d . 12, while a
decaying attractive/repulsive behavior characterizes the
long distance (kF d > 12) impurity interaction. Fur-
thermore, for the symmetric case (α1 = α2), we have
h ˆF1i = −h ˆF2i. The sign changing of the Casimir force as
function of the scatterer distance d is a coherence eﬀect
which is reminiscent of the Friedel density oscillations of
the quantum ﬂuid. The basic properties of these force
oscillations can be captured by considering the limit of
very small scattering strength α. Under this condition,
introducing a low-velocity cutoﬀ vm and taking the zero-
temperature limit we obtain:

h ˆF1i ∝Z 1

vm
vF

dξ

4α3 cos(2kF d ξ)

ξ2

,

(25)

being this expression valid within the symmetric case
α1 = α2 = α and provided that α . 1.5 × 10−2. Thus
quantum coherence seems to be a crucial ingredient in
observing a non-vanishing mechanical action mediated
by a quantum ﬂuid.
Indeed, the Casimir energy as-
sociated to the impurity interaction mediated by a co-
herent one-dimensional ﬂuid takes the asymptotic form7
Ec(x) ∝ W(x)/x, with W(x) an oscillating function of
the impurity distance x related to the Friedel density os-
cillations. Using Ec(x), the Casimir force takes the form
Fc(x) = −∂xEc(x) ∝ x−2W(x) − x−1∂xW(x) which de-
ﬁnes a long-range interaction which decays as the inverse
of the impurities distance (Fc ∼ x−1). We veriﬁed the
long-distance behavior of the h ˆF1i vs kF d curves reported
in Fig. 3 and a d−1 scaling is found. This long-range be-
havior suggests that the Casimir force has an enhanced
relevance in one-dimensional systems where it could be
easily detected in comparison with the three-dimensional
case.

Another important point is the existence of a non-
vanishing Casimir force acting on an impurity in close
proximity of an edge of the system. The presence of an
edge in x = ¯x2 can be emulated by a second scatterer
of inﬁnite scattering strength (α2 → ∞) and considering
the resulting system for x < ¯x2. This scenario is studied

6

(color online) Casimir force h ˆF1i,

in units of
FIG. 3:
EF /(2πa), acting in ¯x1 as a function of the normalized scat-
terer distance kF d, with d = ¯x2 − ¯x1. Diﬀerent curves are
obtained considering the zero-temperature limit (T = 0) and
impurities with identical dimensionless scattering strength
α1 = α2 = α (α = 2aU/(vF )). The bottom curve is ob-
tained ﬁxing α = 0.15, middle and top curves are obtained
ﬁxing α = 0.2 and α = 0.3, respectively. Casimir force acting
on the ﬁrst barrier is attractive at short distance kF d . 12,
while a decaying attractive/repulsive behavior characterizes
the long distance (kF d > 12) impurity interaction. For the
symmetric case (α1 = α2), we have h ˆF1i = −h ˆF2i.

in Fig. 4 where the Casimir force exerted by an edge (full
line) on the impurity located in ¯x1 is compared to the
Casimir force acting on the same impurity and originated
by an identical scatterer (dashed line) having scattering
strength α = 0.1. As clearly shown in Fig. 4, the system
edge provides a stronger Casimir force compared to the
one generated by an identical scatterer placed at the same
distance kF d. Thus, the edge mediated Casimir force
provides a mechanism of eliminating the phase defects
(impurities) conﬁning them towards the system bound-
ary. This observation suggests that the short-distance
edge-mediated Casimir attraction can hinder the diﬀu-
sion towards the system’s bulk of atomic dopants (impu-
rities) located in close vicinity of the system boundaries.
So far we noticed that the Casimir force h ˆF1i presents
only a very weak temperature dependence coming from
the Fermi function in Eq. (24); we also noticed that
the Casimir forces are originated by the coherence of
the quantum ﬂuid as signaled by Friedel-like oscillations.
In this respect, low-temperature are crucial in obtain-
ing coherence and thus non-vanishing Casimir forces. To
support these arguments, we introduce a random (gaus-
sian) dephasing φ within the scattering region mimicking
decoherence phenomena induced by inelastic scattering
events (see Appendix D for details). Using the scattering
ﬁeld theory we derive the phase-dependent Casimir force
h ˆF1iφ, which has to be averaged over random realizations
of inelastic events using the gaussian probability density
function P (φ, σ2), i.e. h ˆF1iφ =R dφh ˆF1iφP (φ, σ2). The
Casimir force under incoherent regime h ˆF1iφ depends on

(color online) Casimir force h ˆF1i,

FIG. 4:
in units of
EF /(2πa), acting in ¯x1 as a function of the normalized scat-
terer distance kF d, with d = ¯x2− ¯x1. The dashed curve (red in
color) represents the Casimir interaction on the scatterer lo-
cated in ¯x1 in the presence of an identical scatterer located in
¯x2, both having a dimensionless scattering strength α = 0.1.
The full line (blue in color) represents the Casimir interac-
tion on the scatterer located in ¯x1 in the presence of an edge
simulated by a second impurity of inﬁnite scattering strength
(α2 → ∞). Zero-temperature limit is considered.

the variance σ2 of the phase ﬂuctuation within the scat-
tering region, σ2 being a decoherence measure. The de-
phasing variance, indeed, can be related to the coherence
length LΦ of the system through the relation σ2 = L/LΦ,
where L is a mesoscopic distance comparable with the
scattering region length d. The coherence length LΦ de-
creases as the temperature is increased and thus the de-
phasing variance σ2 takes high values and induces deco-
herence when L > LΦ. On the other hand, the coherent
regime is recovered at low temperature where the coher-
ence length LΦ becomes larger than the scattering region
length d ∼ L, while σ → 0. According to these argu-
ments, the detrimental eﬀects of temperature aﬀect the
Casimir force through the parametric dependence of the
coherence length LΦ(T ) on temperature. Thus Casimir
mediated forces disappear at suﬃciently high tempera-
ture.

In Fig. 5 we study the eﬀect of decoherence on the
Casimir force h ˆF1i acting on the impurity located in
x = ¯x1 in the presence of a second identical impurity
having scattering strength α = 0.3 and located in x = ¯x2.
The full line curve (blue in color) represents the coher-
ent (σ = 0) Casimir interaction, while decoherence is
progressively introduced considering random dephasing
with standard deviation σ = π/10 (dashed curve, red
in color) and σ = π/2 (dashed dotted curve, green in
color). We notice that the Casimir force disappears as
σ is increased.
In particular, the choice σ = π/10 de-
termines a coherence length LΦ twenty-ﬁve times bigger
than the coherence length obtained for σ = π/2. As a
consequence, in the latter case, the dimensionless Casimir
force is always weaker than 10−3. Thus Casimir interac-
tion can be neglected at high temperature, i.e. when the

7

0

FIG. 6: (color online) Low-frequency force ﬂuctuation K (1)
(in units of EF /(πδ2)) acting on the ﬁrst scatterer (x = ¯x1)
in the presence of a second one located in x = ¯x2 = ¯x1 + d.
Lower curve (red in color) is obtained by ﬁxing the model
parameters as: α1 = α2 = 0.7, kBT = 10−2EF . Upper curve
(blue in color) is obtained by ﬁxing the model parameters
as: α1 = α2 = 0.7, kBT = 5 × 10−2EF . The curve in the
inset is obtained setting the parameters as: α1 = 0.7, α2 =
5 × 10−5, kBT = 5 × 10−2EF . Parallel lines (green lines in
the main ﬁgure and red line in the inset) indicate the noise
level expected for an isolated impurity (Eq. (20)) with the
same scattering strength α of the impurity in x = ¯x1 at the
same temperature. Peaks in the ﬂuctuations are related to
the transmission resonances of the two-impurity system.

(color online) Casimir force h ˆF1i,

in units of
FIG. 5:
EF /(2πa), acting in ¯x1 as a function of the normalized scat-
terer distance kF d, with d = ¯x2 − ¯x1. The full line curve (blue
in color) represents the coherent (σ = 0) Casimir interaction
on the scatterer located in ¯x1 in the presence of an identical
scatterer located in ¯x2, both having a dimensionless scattering
strength α = 0.3. Decoherence is introduced in the system
by considering a gaussian random dephasing with standard
deviation σ = π/10 (dashed curve, red in color) and σ = π/2
(dashed dotted curve, green in color). Zero-temperature limit
is considered. The Casimir interaction is strongly suppressed
as the decoherence increases.

coherence length is small compared to the inter-impurity
distance d. Decreasing the temperature, the coherence
length starts to become greater than d and a non-local
interaction mediated by the coherent ﬂuid aﬀects the im-
purity dynamics. Under this condition, the vibrations
of close impurities are correlated by the Casimir inter-
action. However, in a condensed matter system defects
are pinned at speciﬁc lattice sites as the eﬀect of elas-
tic forces. This implies that the equilibration of Casimir
force with elastic deformations of the lattice determines
a new equilibrium position of the impurity accompanied
by a local mechanical stress. The quantum origin of the
Casimir interaction determines correlated force ﬂuctua-
tions on the impurities. These ﬂuctuations aﬀect the
stochastic impurity vibrations around the equilibrium
positions and can play a role in determining temporal
variations of the system electrical resistance. When a
conductive (ohmic) system is subject to a current bias,
resistance ﬂuctuations determine stochastic voltage vari-
ations which can be studied using the voltage noise spec-
troscopy. In these studies, the voltage spectral density
presents a 1/f -spectrum and a quadratic dependence
on the bias current. The latter phenomenology, which
is quite common in metals, is explained as the cumu-
lative eﬀect of uncorrelated stochastic ﬂuctuators (im-
purities) having lorentzian spectrum. Recently, it has
been reported that a large class of materials undergoing a
weak localization (WL) transition exhibits a sudden vari-
ation of the voltage spectral density at the WL transition
temperature18. This phenomenon has been attributed to
the partial restoration of the particle coherence in WL

0

0

regime. These ﬁndings suggest that ﬂuid-mediated force
ﬂuctuations can aﬀect the stochastic properties of ﬂuctu-
ators introducing unexpected correlation eﬀects among
vibrations of close impurities. Motivated by these ar-
guments, we studied the low-frequency force ﬂuctuation
K (1)
acting on the ﬁrst scatterer (x = ¯x1) in the pres-
ence of a second one located in x = ¯x2. Since we are
interested in the coherence properties of the system, low-
temperature and coherent regime (σ = 0) are assumed
in the computation. The derivation of K (1)
closely fol-
lows the procedure adopted in the single impurity case
and thus in the following we only describe the numerical
results.
In particular, in Fig. 6 we study the ﬂuctuation K (1)
(in
units of EF /(πδ2)) acting on the ﬁrst scatterer (x = ¯x1)
in the presence of a second one located in x = ¯x2 = ¯x1+d.
The lower curve (red in color) is obtained by ﬁxing the
model parameters as: α1 = α2 = 0.7, kBT = 10−2EF . It
shows peaks associated with the transmission resonances
of the two-impurity system as the impurity distance d
is varied. The ﬂuctuation peaks determine an increased
noise level compared to the value expected for an isolated
impurity having the same scattering strength (i.e.
for
α = 0.7 and kBT = 10−2EF ). This behavior persists for
large separation between the impurities even though the
ﬂuctuation peak amplitudes decrease with the distance
d. Interestingly, the Casimir force ﬂuctuations decrease
slower than the Casimir force expectation value as the

0

scatterer distance is increased. Thus, also in the absence
of a net Casimir force, Casimir force ﬂuctuations can play
a relevant role in coupling the dynamics of distant scat-
terers. The upper curve (blue in color) is obtained by
increasing the system temperature (kBT = 5× 10−2EF ),
while setting the scattering strength of the impurities as
done for the lower curve. The higher system temperature
ampliﬁes the mean ﬂuctuation level (and the ﬂuctuation
peak amplitudes) and provides an averaging mechanism
which produces a long-distance constant value of the ﬂuc-
tuation. The long-distance ﬂuctuation value is higher
than the noise level of an isolated impurity (dashed green
line) since the system reﬂection probability of the single-
and two-impurity cases are diﬀerent. The single-impurity
value (dashed red line of the inset) of the ﬂuctuation is re-
covered at long-distance when the scattering strength of
the second impurity is strongly reduced (α2 = 5× 10−5),
as shown in the inset.
Finally, we conclude that quantum force ﬂuctuations act-
ing on a system impurity can be strongly ampliﬁed (com-
pared to the isolated impurity case) in the presence of a
second impurity. This implies that the mechanical ac-
tions aﬀecting impurities immersed in a coherent quan-
tum ﬂuid are correlated via a Casimir-like mechanism
which can play a relevant role in low-dimensional sys-
tems.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have formulated a scattering ﬁeld theory account-
ing for the mechanical actions experienced by impurities
located in a coherent fermionic ﬂuid. The theory allows
the study of equilibrium and out-of-equilibrium situa-
tions taking into account the impurity-ﬂuid interaction
at a non-perturbative level. Using the theory, we studied
the single-impurity and the two-impurity cases. As for
the single-scatterer case, we ﬁnd that a net force aﬀects
the scatterer dynamics only in the presence of a non-
vanishing particle current ﬂowing through the system
(non-equilibrium), while force ﬂuctuations are not neg-
ligible both in equilibrium and in non-equilibrium con-
ditions. Concerning the two-scatterer case, an attractive
ﬂuid-mediated Casimir force is experienced by the scat-
terers at small spatial separation, while a decaying at-
tractive/repulsive behavior as a function of the scatterer
distance is found. We also ﬁnd a Casimir-like force expe-
rienced by an impurity in close vicinity of the boundary
of the system. For the one dimensional system studied
in this work, the Casimir force decays as the inverse of
the impurity distance and thus represents a long-range
interaction which can be easily measured, for instance,
in cold atoms systems. When detrimental eﬀects of de-
coherence are included in the model, the Casimir inter-
action is progressively reduced as the system coherence
length LΦ is decreased. We also studied the Casimir force
ﬂuctuations, measured by K (1)
0 , acting on a given scat-
terer in close vicinity of an other one. We show that

8

0

the K (1)
vs kF d curves present an oscillating behavior
reaching a long-distance limit which is comparable with
the value of the single-scatterer case. Depending on the
impurity separation, at short distance, force ﬂuctuations
can became either stronger or weaker than the force vari-
ance experienced by an isolated impurity. Our ﬁndings
demonstrate that force ﬂuctuations acting on close im-
purities immersed in a coherent ﬂuid are correlated by
Casimir-like interactions which are reminiscent of Friedel
density oscillations and resonant scattering through the
double-impurity system.

Acknowledgements

Antonio Stabile is acknowledged for inspiring discus-
sions about Casimir eﬀect. Discussions with Roberta
Citro, Antonio Di Bartolomeo, Filippo Giubileo, Carlo
Barone and Sergio Pagano are also acknowledged.

Appendix A: S-matrix and T-matrix of the

scattering potential V (x) = λδ(x − x0)

Using the Schr¨odinger-like equation for the ﬁeld ˆΨ(x)
with the single-particle potential V (x) = λδ(x − x0) the
following boundary conditions on ˆΨ(x) can be found:

∂x ˆΨ(x)|x=x+
ˆΨ(x+

0 ) = ˆΨ(x−

0 − ∂x ˆΨ(x)|x=x−
0 ).

0

=

2mλ
2

ˆΨ(x0)

(A1)

The ﬁeld ˆΨ(x) on the left (x < x0) and on the right
(x > x0) of the scatterer can be decomposed in incoming
(ˆai) and outgoing (ˆbi) scattering operators according to
the following expansion:

ˆΨE(x < x0) = ˆa1(E)eikE x + ˆb1(E)e−ikE x
ˆΨE(x > x0) = ˆa2(E)e−ikE x + ˆb2(E)eikE x.

(A2)

Substituting Eq. (A2) into Eq. (A1) one can ﬁnd a re-
lation between the scattering operators ˆai(E) and ˆbi(E).
This relation can be expressed in terms of the S-matrix

according to the expression ˆbi(E) = Pj Sij(E)ˆaj(E),

while the T-matrix relation takes the following form:

ˆb1(E)(cid:19) .
ˆa2(E)(cid:19) = T (E)(cid:18) ˆa1(E)
(cid:18) ˆb2(E)

(A3)

For the potential under discussion we obtain the following
expression for S- and T-matrix:

2

2i+γE

2

2i+γE

2i−γE

γE e−2ikE x0

S(E) =  γE e2ikE x0

2i−γE !
2(cid:18) 2 − iγE −iγEe−2ikE x0

iγEe2ikE x0

2 + iγE

and

T (E) =

1

(A4)

(A5)

(cid:19)

with γE = 2mλ/(2kE) and E = (kE)2/(2m).
In
general, it is possible to demonstrate that det(T ) = 1,
while under time-reversal symmetry the S-matrix ele-
ments are related to those of the T-matrix as follows:
S12 = S21 = 1/T22, S11 = −T21/T22, S22 = T12/T22.

Appendix B: Thermal averages of scattering ﬁelds

The quantum statistical average of two scattering op-
erators is given by hˆa†
i (E)ˆaj (E′)i = δij δ(E − E′)fi(E).
Quantum averages involving four scattering operators
can be evaluated using Wick’s theorem obtaining the fol-
lowing result:

9

the latter formula providing the same result of Equa-
tion (C1).
Appendix D: T-matrix model of random dephasing

Dephasing eﬀects (decoherence) can be studied by in-
troducing random phases within the scattering region19.
In particular we consider the scattering matrix Sφ de-
scribing a pure (reﬂectionless) dephasing process:

1 0(cid:19) ,
Sφ = eiφ(cid:18) 0 1

(D1)

l1

(E1)ˆal2 (E2)ˆa†
l3

(E3)ˆal4(E4)i =

hˆa†
δl1,l2δl3,l4δ(E1 − E2)δ(E3 − E4)fl1 (E1)fl3 (E3) +
δl1,l4δl2,l3δ(E1 − E4)δ(E2 − E3)fl1 (E1)[1 − fl3(E3)].
In deriving the above relation we used the anticommuta-
tion relation {ˆal1(E1), ˆa†

(E2)} = δl1,l2 δ(E1 − E2).

(B1)

l2

Appendix C: M(E) Matrix

The matrix M(E) deﬁning the relation between the
inner mode operators ˆα(E) and ˆβ(E) on ˆai(E) can be
written in terms of the transfer matrix T1(E) of the im-
purity located in x = ¯x1 and of the scattering matrix
elements Sij(E) of the whole system according to the
relation:

M(E) = T1(E) ·(cid:18)

1

S11(E) S12(E)(cid:19) .

0

(C1)

The derivation of the above result exploits the following
relations linking the scattering ﬁelds:

ˆb1(E)(cid:19) ,
ˆβ(E)(cid:19) = T1(E)(cid:18) ˆa1(E)
(cid:18) ˆα(E)
ˆβ(E)(cid:19) ,
ˆa2(E)(cid:19) = T2(E)(cid:18) ˆα(E)
(cid:18) ˆb2(E)
ˆb1(E)(cid:19) ,
ˆa2(E)(cid:19) = T (E)(cid:18) ˆa1(E)
(cid:18) ˆb2(E)

(C2)

(C3)

(C4)

where T (E) = T2(E) · T1(E) represents the transfer ma-
trix of the two-impurity system written in terms of the
transfer matrices of the ﬁrst and second impurity. The
matrix M(E) can be also derived in terms of T2(E) ac-
cording to the expression:

M(E) = T −1

2

(E) ·(cid:18) S21(E) S22(E)

0

1

(cid:19) ,

(C5)

a

where φ represents
random gaussian variable
(with probability density distribution P (φ, σ2) =

exp(−φ2/(2σ2))/√2πσ2) having zero expectation value,

φ = 0, and ﬁnite variance σ2 = φ2, the latter quantity be-
ing related with the decoherence. The scattering matrix
Sφ determines the relations ˆb1 = eiφˆa2 and ˆb2 = eiφˆa1
such that the T-matrix of a pure dephasing process can
be written as:

τφ =(cid:18) eiφ

0 e−iφ(cid:19) .

0

(D2)

Let us study a sequence of N scatterers located at x1 <
x2 < ... < xN and characterized by a collection of T-
matrices whose generic element T (xi) describes the scat-
tering properties of the ith scatterer. Using the T-matrix
composition rule, the T-matrix of the whole system is
simply given by the matrix product T = T (xN ) . . . T (x1).
In the presence of decoherence eﬀects the T-matrix com-
position rule can be corrected inserting the dephasing

the scattering ﬁeld theory, we can compute any observ-
able X(φ) at ﬁxed dephasing φ, while the decoherence
eﬀect on the observable is obtained performing the phase

matrix, i.e. eT = T (xN ) . . . τφ · T (x1). Using eT within
average X(φ) =R dφX(φ)P (φ, σ2) using the probability
series X(φ) =P∞

density distribution of the phase ﬂuctuations P (φ, σ2).
Assuming that the phase dependence of the physical ob-
servable can be expanded according to the trigonometric
n=0[cn cos(nφ) + sn sin(nφ)], we obtain

the phase-averaged observable

X(φ) = c0 +

∞Xn=1

cn exp(cid:16) −

n2σ2

2 (cid:17),

(D3)

showing the high harmonics smearing and a tendency to
converge towards the average value c0 as the degree of
decoherence increases (σ → ∞). In deriving the above
result we used sin(nφ) = 0,∀n due to the even integration
domain ] − ∞,∞[ of the φ variable.

1 H. B. G. Casimir, Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wet. 51, 793-795

(1948).

2 V. Mostepanenko and N. Trunov, The Casimir Eﬀect and

Its Applications (Clarendon, Oxford, 1997).

3 S. K. Lamoreaux, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 5 (1997); S. K.
Lamoreaux, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5475 (1998); U. Mohideen
and A. Roy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4549 (1998); G. Bressi,
G. Carugno, R. Onofrio, and G. Ruoso, Phys. Rev. Lett.
88, 041804 (2002); R. S. Decca, D. L´opez, H. B. Chan,
E. Fischbach, D. E. Krause, and C. R. Jamell, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 94, 240401 (2005).

4 T. H. Boyer, Phys. Rev. 174, 1764 (1968); T. Emig, A.
Hanke, and M. Kardar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 260402 (2001);
O. Schroeder, A. Scardicchio, and R. L. Jaﬀe, Phys. Rev.
A 72, 012105 (2005); T. Emig, A. Hanke, R. Golestanian,
and M. Kardar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 250402 (2005).

5 J. N. Munday, Federico Capasso, and V. Adrian Parsegian,

Nature 457, 170 (2009).

6 J. N. Fuchs, A. Recati, and W. Zwerger, Phys. Rev.
A 75, 043615 (2007); P. W¨achter, V. Meden, and K.
Sch¨onhammer, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045123 (2007).

7 A. Recati, J. N. Fuchs, C. S. Pe¸ca, and W. Zwerger, Phys.

Rev. A 72, 023616 (2005).

8 D. Zhabinskaya, J. M. Kinder, and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev.

A 78, 060103(R) (2008).

9 A. Recati, P. O. Fedichev, W. Zwerger, J. von Delft, and

P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 040404 (2005).

10 Pawel Utko, Raﬀaello Ferone, Ilya V. Krive, Robert I.
Shekhter, Mats Jonson, Marc Monthioux, Laure No´e and

10

Jesper Nyg˚ard, Nat. Commun. 1, 37 (2010).

11 Boris Dzyubenko, Hao-Chun Lee, Oscar E. Vilches David
H. Cobden, Nature Physics 11, 398 (2015); F. Romeo, R.
Citro, A. Di Bartolomeo, Phys. Rev. B 84, 153408 (2011).
12 Anne-Florence Bitbol, Paul G. Dommersnes, and Jean-

Baptiste Fournier, Phys. Rev. E 81, 050903(R) (2010).

13 B. Yurke and G. P. Kochanski, Phys. Rev. B 41, 8184

(1990).

14 C. Presilla, R. Onofrio and M. F. Bocko, Phys. Rev. B 45,

3735 (1992).

15 M. B¨uttiker, Phys. Rev. B 46, 12485 (1992).
16 In the spinful case a prefactor two accounting for the spin

degeneracy has to be included.

17 For consistency reasons, the force h ˆFii has to be computed
assuming impurity distance d > 2a, being a a small quan-
tity of the theory. This constraint ensures that the scat-
tering ﬁeld ˆΨm(x, t) is a well-deﬁned quantity acting on a
ﬁnite length region.

18 C. Barone, F. Romeo, A. Galdi, P. Orgiani, L. Maritato,
A. Guarino, A. Nigro, S. Pagano, Phys. Rev. B 87, 245113
(2013); C. Barone, F. Romeo, S. Pagano, C. Attanasio, G.
Carapella, C. Cirillo, A. Galdi, G. Grimaldi, A. Guarino,
A. Leo, A. Nigro, P. Sabatino, Sci. Rep. 5, 10705 (2015).
19 Marco Pala and Giuseppe Iannaccone, Phys. Rev. B 69,
235304 (2004); Marco G. Pala and Giuseppe Iannac-
cone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 256803 (2004); Huaixiu Zheng,
Zhengfei Wang, Qinwei Shi, Xiaoping Wang and Jie Chen,
Phys. Rev. B 74, 155323 (2006).

