5
1
0
2

 
c
e
D
8

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
3
5
6
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Splash Detail Due to Grain Incident on Granular Bed

Takahiro Tanabe1, Tomoki Koike2, Takashi Shimada2, Nobuyasu Ito2, and Hiraku Nishimori1 ∗

1Department of Mathematical and Life Science, Graduate school of Science,

Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan

2Department of Applied Physics, Graduate school of Engineering,

The University of Tokyo 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

(Dated: March 22, 2016)

Using the discrete element method (DEM), we study the splash processes induced by the impact
of a grain on two types of granular beds, namely, randomly packed and FCC-structured beds. Good
correspondence is obtained between our numerical results and the ﬁndings of previous experiments,
and it is demonstrated that the packing structure of the granular bed strongly aﬀects the splash
process. The mean ejection angle for the randomly packed bed is consistent with previous exper-
imental results. The FCC-structured bed yields a larger mean ejection angle; however, the latter
result has not been conﬁrmed experimentally. Furthermore, the ejection angle distributions and
the vertical ejection speeds for individual grains vary depending on the relative timing at which the
grains are ejected after the initial impact. Obvious diﬀerences are observed between the distribu-
tions of grains ejected during the earlier and later splash periods: the form of the vertical ejection
speed distribution varies from a power-law form to a lognormal form with time, and more than 80%
of the kinetic energy of all ejected grains is used for earlier ejected grains.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Massive sediment transport phenomena, such as dust
storms and drifting snow, pose a considerable threat to
human life. Further, the formation of geomorphological
patterns on sand-desert and snowﬁeld surfaces as a re-
sult of sediment transport, such as dunes and ripples, is
of considerable research interest. To elucidate the granu-
lar transport that occurs near the surfaces of sand deserts
and snow ﬁelds, it is necessary to focus on the collisions
between wind-blown grains and these surfaces along with
the resultant ejection of grains from the surfaces. This
approach is merited because, in the case of wind-blown
grain transport, the major component of the grain en-
trainment into the air is caused by both the collision and
ejectionciteBagnold,Sus. This mechanism is called the
“splash process.”

Splash processes have been widely studied using vari-
ous techniques. For example, Werner et al. have simu-
lated grain-bed collision processes in a two-dimensional
system[3], while Nishida et al. have performed numer-
ical simulations of granular splash behavior in a three-
dimensional (3D) system and analyzed the relation be-
tween the impact and ejection angles (θI and θE, respec-
tively) projected onto the surface of a granular bed[4].
Further, Xing and He have performed 3D collision simu-
lations with mixed binary grains[5], and Wada et al. have
numerically modeled the impact cratering process on a
granular target[6]. In a physical experiment, Katsuragi et
al. created small-scale craters in a laboratory system[7],
whereas Sugiura et al. estimated the splash function of
snow grains via wind-tunnel experiments[8, 9].
In ad-
dition, Ammi et al. performed a 3D splash experiment
and recorded the results using two high-speed cameras,

demonstrating that the mean ejection angle θE of a se-
ries of splashed grains is independent of both θI and the
velocity of the incident grains V I , and it is close to 60◦
[10]. In their experiment, a randomly packed (RP) bed
was considered, and the ﬁnal result suggests that the
behavior at the ﬁrst instance of impact during a splash
process involving a granular bed has no inﬂuence on the
later behavior.

In the present study, we perform numerical simulations
in order to investigate the splash processes in more detail.
Assuming that the packing structure of a granular bed
aﬀects the splash behavior, we consider not only an RP
bed (an RP bed corresponds to the scenario examined
in the experiment of Ammi et al.[10], except for diﬀer-
ences in the dimensions of the simulation space and the
grain features), but also an FCC-structured bed (here-
after, “FCC bed”). Thus, we analyze the dependence
of the splash process on the bed structure. In addition,
we investigate the details of the ejection grains for each
splash paying attention to their ejection timing.

II. MODEL

A. Basic Setup

In this study, the splash processes are examined using
the discrete element method (DEM). The translational
movement of the grains obeys Newton’s law of motion,
and grain rotation is neglected. Thus, the equation of
motion is

mi ¨xi =Xj

(F i,j

H + F i,j

D ) − migez,

(1)

∗ nishimor@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

where xi and mi are the position and the mass of the i-th
grain, respectively; and g and ez are the gravity constant

B. Grain Interaction

2

We treat grains as viscoelastic spheres. For the elastic

force, we adopt the Hertzian force F i,j

H [11], with

F i,j

H = −knr rirj
n = |δi,j

ri + rj

δi,j
n δi,j
n ,

(2)

where kn, ri, and δi,j
n | are the Young’s modulus,
the radius of the i-th grain, and the displacement from
the natural contact position ri +rj , respectively. Further,

n =(0,

δi,j

h|xi − xj| − (ri + rj)ini,j,

(3)
where ni,j = (xi − xj)/|xi − xj| is the unit vector in the
normal direction.
To represent the energy dissipation, we adopt the fric-

(non−contact),
(contact),

tion force F i,j

D , with

F i,j
D = −ηnvi,j

n = − αsm∗knr rirj

ri + rj

δi,j
n vi,j
n ,

(4)

where vi,j
n , ηn, and m∗, are the relative normal velocity,
damping coeﬃcient, and the reduced mass, respectively.
Note that α is relative to the restitution coeﬃcient e [12].
In our simulation, the value of e is ﬁxed at 0.9.

When the grains reach the boundaries, the sum of the
Hertzian and friction forces acts on the grains such that
the work force F i

W is expressed as

F i

W = −knpriδi

n

δi
n − ηn,wvi
n,

(5)

where ηn,w is the damping coeﬃcient between grains and
boundaries. This equation corresponds to Eqs. (2) and
(4), with the plain wall limit: rj → ∞.

C. Packing Structure

We construct the initial RP and FCC beds as follows.
The RP bed is created through the free falling of 32,768
grains. At ﬁrst, all grains are placed at random posi-
tions in the simulation box, with no overlap. Then, they
fall to the bottom as a result of the eﬀects of g, losing
kinetic energy through the dissipative repulsive force of
Eqs. (2)–(5). The packing process is completed after a
suﬃcient relaxation time has elapsed.

On the other hand, the initial positions of the grains
in the FCC bed are approximately determined, except
for the ﬁne tuning of their positions according to g and
the nonlinear interactions of Eqs. (2)–(5). Similar to the
previous RP procedure, the packing of the FCC struc-
ture is completed after a suﬃcient relaxation time has
elapsed. The volume fractions of the RP and FCC beds
are approximately 0.63 and 0.74, respectively.
In pre-
vious experiments with monodispersed spherical beads,

FIG. 1. a) Snapshot of the splash process. The black and
yellow chains represent the motion of the incident and ejected
grains, respectively. b) Deﬁnitions of the incident angle θI ,
incident velocity V I , ejection angle θE, and ejection velocity
V E.

H and F i,j

and the vertical unit vector in the upward direction, re-
spectively. F i,j
D represent the repulsive and dis-
sipative forces acting between the i-th and j-th grains,
respectively, as explained in Sect. 2.2. Our “simulation
box” consists of a ﬁxed bottom and walls, which make
up a rooﬂess 3D cubic container (Fig.1). The walls and
the bottom ﬂoor are made of the same material as the
grains. Two types of initial granular bed structures are
prepared (RP and FCC), as explained in greater detail
in Sect. 2.3.

A grain is ﬁred at the bed at a certain incident an-
gle θI and incident speed VI (Fig. 1(b)). As a result of
the collision between the projectile grain and the gran-
ular bed, a number of grains are expelled from the bed.
Here, we deﬁne the initially projected grain as the “inci-
dent grain” and the expelled grains that reach a certain
threshold height (see Sect. 2.4) as the “ejected grains”
(Fig. 1(a)). We exclude the rebounding incident grain
from consideration as an ejected grain. In this study, we
consider monodispersed grains only; therefore, all of the
grains comprising the granular bed and the incident grain
have the same mass and radius. The parameters used in
the simulation are summarized in Table I.

TABLE I. Simulation parameters

Parameter

Value
System size (bottom area) 35 × 35 cm2

Gravity
Young’s modulus
Grain radius
Grain mass

10 m/s2
1.0 × 109 kg/ms2
0.5 cm
0.1 g

the volume fraction of the grains was approximately 0.6
in RP beds[6, 10, 13].
It has been reported for a two-
dimensional system that a bed thickness of more than 24
layers is needed to exclude the shockwave eﬀects. The
average height of the RP bed surface is approximately
22 grains. To construct the FCC bed, 36,639 grains and
a 24-layer pile are used.

D. Deﬁnition of Injection and Ejection

1).

The pair of VI and θI characterize the injection of
the incident grain (Fig.
For a given VI and
θI , the incident velocity is determined from V I =
(VI cos θI , 0,−VI sin θI ). In this study, VI is set to 10.0,
25.0, or 40.0 m/s while θI is varied among 10◦, 40◦, 60◦,
and 90◦. To obtain suﬃcient data for statistically mean-
ingful results, 100 splash simulations are conducted for
each set of (VI , θI ), with diﬀerent initial positions.

The horizontal coordinate of the “collision point”
(xc, yc, zc) between the incident grain and the granular
bed surface is given randomly within a central horizon-
tal circle on the bed surface, which we call the “inci-
dent circle.” The radius of this circle is three times
the grain diameter. The center of the incident circle is
(Lx/2, Ly/2, zb), where Lx and Ly are the lengths of the
x and y sides of the simulation box, respectively (Fig.
1(b)), and zb is the highest z coordinate of the grain
surface (the upper edge of the highest grain) within the
above-mentioned incident circle. The initial position of
the incident grain (grain center) is (x0, y0, z0) = (xc −
tcVI cos θI , yc, zb + 2r), where r is the radius of the inci-

I sin θ2 + 4gr(cid:17).g

dent grain, and tc =(cid:16)−VI sin θ +pV 2

is the time required for collision with the surface, cal-
culated from the given V I . We deﬁne grains with cen-
ters that reach zth as “ejected grains” and record their
ejection velocity V E, where zth is 2r above the aver-
age bed surface height around the contact point. Fur-
thermore, we deﬁne the rebound of the incident grain
(“rebound grain”) and its velocity V R with same def-
inition as the ejected grains. This ejected-grain crite-
rion roughly corresponds to those of previous 3D splash
experiments[10, 13]. In this paper, we also deﬁne θE as

3

FIG. 2. Mean restitution coeﬃcient of the incident grain eR =
VR/VI for (a) various incident angles θI (VI = 25.0m/s: ﬁxed)
and (b) incident speeds VI (θI = 10◦ (circle) and 90◦ (square):
ﬁxed) in RP (ﬁlled symbol) and FCC (open symbol) beds.
The error bars indicate standard deviations, and the dashed
line is the best ﬁt of the form A − R sin θI for the RP bed
(A ≈ 0.86 and B ≈ 0.60).

2

2), where EI = mV 2

is important to consider for the ejected grains. Since Eb is
equal to the energy lost by the incident grain, we obtain
the following relation: Eb = EI − mVR
/2 = EI (1 −
I /2, eR = VR/VI , and VR is the
eR
mean speed of the incident grain at z = zth after impact.
Therefore, we focus on eR to characterize the incident
energy transferred to the bed. Figure 2 shows that eR
only depends on the incident angle and does not depend
on the incident speed; these results reproduce those in
previous experiments[3, 10]. Our result obtained for the
RP bed corresponds well with the ﬁtting function

E,x + V 2

E,y

E,x + V 2

E,y + V 2
E,z

(6)

eR(θI ) = A − B sin θI

(7)

which was proposed in a previous study[10] (Fig. 2(a)).
In our simulation, A ≈ 0.86 and B ≈ 0.60 for VI =
25.0m/s; these values are close to those from previous
collision experiments. The value of eR obtained for the
FCC bed is larger than that for the RP bed for same
pair of VI and θI . Because of the lower roughness of the
FCC bed surface, the error bars are very small. From
aforementioned results, the fraction of incident energy
2) increases with θI and is independent of VI , and
(1− eR
2) for the FCC bed is smaller than that for the
(1 − eR
RP bed.

θE = arccos

qV 2
qV 2

 ,

where VE,x, VE,y, and VE,z are the components of V E
(Fig. 1(b)).

III. RESULTS

A.

Incident Energy

The mean incident energy Eb, which means the energy
transferred from the incident grain to the granular beds,

4

FIG. 3. Mean number of ejected grains renormalized by
2) (eR is the mean restitution coeﬃcient of the re-
(1 − eR
bounded incident grain) versus the incident speed VI for var-
ious incident angles θI (circles: 10◦, and squares: 60◦). The
ﬁlled and open symbols correspond to RP and FCC beds, re-
spectively. The dashed lines are ﬁts based on Eq. (8). The
error bars indicate standard deviations.

B. Ejection Number

The number of ejected grains after each splash process
is related to the amount of kinetic energy transferred
from the incident grain to the granular bed. Kinetic en-
ergy propagates into the granular bed, in which the en-
ergy is dissipated via the interactions between the grains.
Because increases in θI and VI produce a high value of
Eb, the ensemble averages of the mean number of ejected
grains for each splash n increase with θI and VI . In the
previous study by Ammi et al., the relation between n
and VI was obtained from

n(VI ) ∼ n0(1 − eR

2)(cid:20) VI
ζ√gd − 1(cid:21) ,

(8)

where n0 and ζ are the ﬁtting parameters. Our numerical
results ﬁt well with Eq.
(8), where the values of the
parameter pair are (n0, ζ) ≈ (43, 26) for the RP bed and
(n0, ζ) ≈ (18, 28) for the FCC bed (Fig. 3). The value of
n for the case of the RP bed is more than twice that for
the FCC bed. This reﬂects the facts that the grains in
the FCC bed experience a stronger geometrical constraint
from the neighboring grains than those in the RP bed
because of the higher volume fraction of the former, and
Eb for the FCC bed is less than that for the RP bed in
all pairs of VI and θI (Fig 2).

C. Ejection Angle

Figure 4 shows the ensemble averages of the mean ejec-
tion angle for each splash θE for various values of θI (Fig.
4(a)) and VI (Fig. 4(b)). According to the previously re-
ported RP bed experiment[10], θE remains constant as
θI and VI are varied. Figure 4(a) shows the θI depen-
dence of θE for VI = 25 m/s. In this ﬁgure, our θE for

FIG. 4. Mean ejection angle θE for various (a) incident angles
θI (VI = 25.0m/s: ﬁxed) and (b) incident speeds VI (θI = 60◦:
ﬁxed) in RP (ﬁlled circles) and FCC (open squares) beds. The
error bars indicate standard deviations.

the RP bed remains almost constant and independent of
θI , which is consistent with the previous experiment[10].
On the other hand, the θE for the FCC bed clearly varies
with θI , especially at low θI (Fig. 4(a)). For the FCC
bed, Eb become small at low θI (Fig. 2). This means
that the FCC bed obtains insuﬃcient energy to break the
geometric constraint caused by the presence of the neigh-
boring grains; hence, the ejection directions are strongly
limited to high angles. However, the result for the FCC
bed has not been conﬁrmed experimentally. Figure 4(b)
shows the VI dependence of θE for ﬁxed θI = 60◦. For
the RP bed, only a weak dependence is observed at low
VI , although this has not been conﬁrmed experimentally
[10]. On the other hand, θE exhibits an obvious depen-
dence on VI for the FCC bed. That is, θE decreases as
VI increases. This is attributed to the magnitude of Eb,
as discussed above.

The ejection angle distributions P (θE) are shown in
Fig. 5. P (θE) for the RP bed obviously diﬀers from that
obtained for the FCC bed. The majority of grains ejected
from the FCC bed have greater θE than those ejected
from the RP bed (Fig. 5(a)). On the other hand, P (θE)
for the RP bed is independent of θI , and the shapes and
locations of the peaks around 60◦ exhibit good agreement
with the ﬁndings of a previous numerical experiment us-
ing binary grains[5] (Fig. 5(b)).

To investigate each splash process in greater detail, we
classify the ejected grains into three groups on the ba-
sis of their ejection timing. The ﬁrst group G1 consists
of grains that were ejected in the period between the
moment of impact and the ﬁrst third of the total ejec-
tion period of each splash process. The ejection angles

5

FIG. 5.
(a) Ejection angle distributions P (θE) for RP (ﬁlled
circles) and FCC (open squares) beds. The incident angle θI
and incident speed VI are ﬁxed (θI = 60◦ and VI = 25.0m/s,
respectively). P (θE) for (b) RP and (c) FCC beds for various
values of θI (VI = 25.0 m/s: ﬁxed).

FIG. 6.
(a) Scatter plot of the grains in the G1, G2, and
G3 groups on the VE,x,y − VE,z plane. The ﬁlled circles and
open squares represent grains ejected from the RP and FCC
beds, respectively. Ejection angle distributions P (θα
E) for (b)
RP and (c) FCC beds. θα
E is the ejection angle of Gα (α =
{1, 2, 3}, VI = 25.0 m/s, and θI = 90◦).

of the particles in this group are labeled θ1
E. Similarly,
the ejection angles of the grains in groups G2 and G3,
which were ejected within the intermediate period and
the last third of each splash process, respectively, are la-
beled θ2
E, respectively. Figure 6 shows scatter
plots for grains belonging to the G1, G2, and G3 groups
on the VE,x,y − VE,z plane, where VE,x,y indicates the
projection of V E onto the bed surface. The ejection an-

E and θ3

FIG. 7.

for

Normalized mean ejection speed |gV E|,

(a) various

incident angles θI
(VI = 25.0m/s) and (b) incident speeds VI (θI = 10◦) in RP

|gVE,y|, and |gVE,z|,
(ﬁlled symbols) and FCC (open symbols) beds, where gV E =
( gVE,x, gVE,y, gVE,z) =(VE,x/√2gzth, VE,y/√2gzth,VE,z/√2gzth).

| gVE,x|,

gle is deﬁned as the angle between the horizontal axis
and the line connecting the origin and each point in Fig.
6(a), which indicates that the magnitude of V E varies
depending on the ejection timing. The distributions of
θ1
E, θ2
E), respectively)
for VI = 25.0m/s and θI = 90◦ are also shown for both
bed types (Fig. 6(b) and (c)).

E), and P (θ3

E, and θ3

E), P (θ2

E (P (θ1

E) and P (θ2

Since the peaks of P (θ1

E) obtained for the
RP bed and those for the FCC bed are at greater an-
gles, these grains seem to be aﬀected by their neighbor-
ing grains. This is particularly true in the FCC case
(Fig. 6(c)), where the grain movements are obviously re-
E) and P (θ2
stricted to the higher angles: both P (θ1
E) have
peaks around 90◦, but the peak of P (θ1
E) is higher than
that of P (θ2
E) for both bed types
are diﬀerent than those of P (θ1
E)
peaks are clearly located within a lower range of angles
compared to those of P (θ1
E). As supported
by the discussion of the VE,z results in the next section,
these results for the FCC bed suggest that the grain ejec-
tion direction is more strongly restricted by geometrical
constraints compared to the RP bed.

E). The proﬁles of P (θ3

E) and P (θ2

E); the P (θ3

E) and P (θ2

D. Ejection Velocity

Figure 7 shows the ensamble averages of the mean

ejection speed for each splash |gV E| and its components
|gVE,β| (β ∈ {x, y, z}) for various values of θI (Fig.
7(a)) and VI (Fig. 7(b)), where gV E=(gVE,x,gVE,y,gVE,z)=

(VE,x/√2gzth,VE,y/√2gzth,VE,z/√2gzth). For all pairs

6

for VI = 25.0 m/s. Although there is a slight ﬂuctua-

almost constant as θI is varied for both bed structures.

of θI and VI , the greater part of |gV E| is |gVE,z|. Fig-
ure 7(a) shows the θI dependence of |gV E| and |gVE,β|
tion within the low-incident-angle region, |gV E| remains
In the RP bed, there is a small gap between |gVE,x| and
|gVE,y| for θI = 10◦. In contrast, |gVE,x| and |gVE,y| are the
pendency of |gV E| and |gVE,β| for θI = 10◦. In this ﬁgure,

the mean ejection speed increases as VI increases. These
θI and VI dependencies are consistent with a previous
study[5].

almost same for θI ≥ 40◦. Figure 7(b) shows the VI de-

We next investigate the distributions of each compo-

ferent bed structures in Fig. 8. For the RP bed, both

ance (Fig. 8 (c)). These results are consistent with the
ﬁndings of previous experimental studies[10, 13]. Note
that these forms are independent of both θI and VI (Fig.

nent of gV E, P (gVE,x), P (gVE,y) and P (gVE,z), for the dif-
P (gVE,x) and P (gVE,y) have Gaussian distributions (Fig.
8 (a) and (b)), whereas P (gVE,z) has a log-normal appear-
8(a), (b) and (c)). For the FCC bed, P (gVE,z) appears to
but both P (gVE,x) and P (gVE,y) are more concentrated
(e)). Regarding the diﬀerence between the P (gVE,z) for

the RP and FCC beds, the latter has a bump within the
large VE,z range (see also Fig. 6(a1)).

around 0 m/s than those for the RP bed (Fig. 8 (d) and

be similar to that obtained for the RP bed (Fig. 8 (f)),

in conformity to the groups G1, G2, and G3, as V 1
and V 3

E,z), and P (gV 3
E,x and gV α
E,x) and P (gV 1

tion speed distributions P (gV 1
E,z), P (gV 2
in the RP bed. For all α ∈ {1, 2, 3}, gV α
pend on the ejection timing; P (gV 1
9(a) and (b)). P (gV 2
E,z) and P (gV 3
gion of P (gV 1

We also deﬁne the timing-dependent ejection velocities
E, V 2
E,
E, respectively. Figure 9 shows the vertical ejec-
E,z)
obtained for θI = 10◦ and θI = 90◦ for VI = 25.0 m/s
E,y have
Gaussian-like form, but their forms are diﬀerent and de-
E,y) have
large variances, and the others have small variances (Fig.
E,z) ﬁt well with the log-
normal distributions, but the higher-ejection-speed re-
E,z) seems to have a power-law form (Fig.
9(c)). That is, the distributions change from a power-
law form to a log-normal form as the ejection speed is
decreases (or with increasing elapsed time since impact).
As this power-law region is only a small fraction of the
total vertical ejection speed distribution, the overall dis-

tribution P (gVE,z) throughout each splash process is ﬁt

well with a log-normal distribution. This distribution de-
formation becomes clear with increasing incident angle.
Further, these types of distribution transformations have
been reported in various ﬁelds. For example, fragment
experiments have conﬁrmed that the fragment size dis-
tribution of glass qualitatively changes from a log-normal
distribution to power-law form in accordance with the in-

FIG. 8.
Ejection velocity distributions for (a) Vx, (b) Vy,
and (c) Vz obtained for the RP bed and those for (d) Vx, (e)
Vy, and (f) Vz obtained for the FCC bed for various incident
angles θI and speeds VI . All values are normalized by √2gzth.
The dashed lines represent the best ﬁt for each distribution
for θI = 90◦ and VI = 25.0 m/s (ﬁlled circles).

cident energy[15, 16]. Speciﬁcally, log-normal and power-
law distributions are exhibited at lower and higher ener-
gies, respectively. Therefore, our results may be related
to these ﬁndings.

E. Ejection Energy

2

We show the energy balances in Fig. 10. The energy
balance between the incident energy Eb and the total
kinetic energy of the ejected grains EE = mn|V E|
/2
10(a). As noted from previous
is shown in Fig.
experiments[10], the relation between Eb and EE is EE ≈
rEb, where r is a constant parameter (r ≈ 0.12 in our re-
sult). Because the rotational motion of a grain is not
considered in this study, that is, the obtained kinetic en-
ergy reﬂects only translational motion, r in our study
may be greater than r in the experiment of Ammi et al
(r ≈ 0.04)[10]. Previously, it was found that r depends
on the restitution coeﬃcient in a binary collision[17].
Figure 10(b) and (c) show the energy ratio Eα
R =

7

FIG. 10.
(a)The relation between the total kinetic energy
of the splashed grains and the fraction of energy transferred
2). All values are normalized
into the granular bed EI(1 − eR
by mgzth. Energy ratio E α
R = E α
various incident angles θI (VI = 10.0m/s: open symbols and
VI = 25.0m/s: closed symbols) and (c) incident speeds VI
(θI = 10◦: open symbols and θI = 90◦: ﬁlled symbols) (α =
{1, 2, 3}). All points are obtained for the RP bed.

E(cid:17) for (b)

E/(cid:16)E 1

E + E 3

E + E 2

the grain movement direction is strongly aﬀected by the
surrounding grains in the FCC bed. Furthermore, the
ejection velocity distributions for the RP bed exhibited
qualitatively good agreement with the results of previ-
ous experiments[10]. On the other hand, coupled with
the ejection angle results, the distributions obtained for
the FCC bed indicate that the vertical movement of the
ejected grains is dominant and that movement in the hor-
izontal direction is signiﬁcantly smaller than that for the
RP bed.

In addition, the ejected-grain characteristics, i.e., the
ejection angle and speed, evidently depend on the ejec-
tion timing after the initial grain impact. For the ejection
angle, the diﬀerence between the ejected grain angles at
the beginning and end of each splash is apparent. Re-
garding the vertical ejection speed, the ejection timing
determines the distribution, and this distribution changes
from a power-law form to a log-normal form according to
the ejection timing. Furthermore, the splashed grains at
the beginning of each splash gain retains around 80% of
the total kinetic energy of the ejected grains. These re-
sults are assumed to be related to the propagation of the
impact energy, both along and beneath the surface of the
granular bed.

E,x/√2gzth) and (b) P (V α

FIG. 9. Normalized horizontal ejection speed distributions
E,y/√2gzth) for θI = 10◦
(a) P (V α
(open symbols) and θI = 90◦ (closed symbols), and vertical
E,z/√2gzth) for (c1) θI = 10◦
ejection speed distributions P (V α
and (c2) θI = 90◦ for the RP bed (VI = 25.0 m/s: ﬁxed). V α
E
is the ejection velocity of Gα (α ∈ {1, 2, 3}). The dashed lines
represent the ﬁts obtained for a log-normal distribution.

Eα

E + E 2

E + E 3

E/(cid:16)E 1

2

E(cid:17) for the RP bed, where Eα

E =

E

EV α

mnα
/2 is the total kinetic energy of ejected grains
belonging to Gα, and nα ≈ n/3 is mean number of
ejected grains per impact for Gα. Figure 10(b) shows the
θI dependence of Eα
R for VI = 10.0 m/s and VI = 25.0
m/s, and Fig. 10(c) shows the VI dependence of Eα
R for
θI = 10◦ and θI = 90◦. In these ﬁgures, Eα
R is almost
independent of θI ; in particular, for larger values of VI ,
the values of Eα
R for θI = 10◦ and θI = 90◦ are mostly co-
incident, and more than 80% of the total ejection energy
is used for G1 grains.

IV. SUMMARY

We performed 3D splash process simulations using the
DEM for two kinds of granular bed structures: a ran-
domly structured bed and an FCC-structured bed. It was
found that the mean number of ejected grains for each
collision was related to the injection energy. After renor-
malization by the energy transferred from the incident
grain to the granular bed, a good linear ﬁt was obtained
between the mean number of ejected grains and the in-
cident speed, with the RP bed ejecting twice as many
grains as the FCC bed. Moreover, the ejection angle
distributions obtained from the RP and FCC beds were
shown to be clearly diﬀerent. The peak of the ejection
angle distribution for the RP bed was approximately 60◦;
on the other hand, the distribution obtained for the FCC
bed distinctively shifted to greater ejection angles, with
a peak of over 80◦. This diﬀerence is assumed to orig-
inate from the geometrical constraints. In other words,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank A. Awazu and H. Niiya for useful
discussions. This research is partially supported by the

Platform Project for Supporting in Drug Discovery and
Life Science Research (Platform for Dynamic Approaches
to Living System) from Japan Agency for Medical Re-
search and Development (AMED)

8

[1] R. A. Bagnold, The Physics of Blown Sand and Desert

[9] J. N. McElwaine, N. Maeno and K. Sugiura, Annals of

Dunes, Methuen, London, (1941).

Glaciology, 38, 71-78, (2004).

[2] R. S. Anderson and P. K. Haﬀ, Science, 241, 820-823,

[10] M. Ammi, L. Oger, D. Beladjine and A. Valance, Phys.

(1988).

[3] B. T. Werner and P. K. Haﬀ, Sedimentology, 35, 189-196,

(1988).

[4] M. Nishida, J. Nagamatsu and K. Tanaka, Journal of
Solid Mechanics and Materials Engineering, 5, 164-178,
(2011).

[5] M. Xing and C. He, Geomorphology, 187, 94-100, (2013).
[6] K. Wada, S. Senshu and T. Matsui, ICARUS, 180, 528-

Rev. E, 79, 021305, (2009).

[11] H. J. Hertz, Reine Angrew. Math, 92, 156-171, (1881).
[12] Y. Tsuji, T. Kawaguchi and T. Tanaka, Powder Technol-

ogy, 77, 79-87, (1993).

[13] D. Beladjine, M. Ammi, L. Oger and A. Valance, Phys.

Rev. E, 75, 061305, (2007).

[14] F. Rioual, A. Valance and D. Bideau, Phys. Rev. E, 62,

2450, (2000).

545, (2006).

[15] T. Ishii and M. Matsushita, J. Phys. Soc. Jap., 61, 3474-

[7] H. Katsuragi and D. J. Durian, Nature Physics, 3, 420-

3477, (1992).

423, (2007).

[16] H. Katsuragi, D. Sugino and H. Honjo, Phys. Rev. E, 70,

[8] K. Sugiura and N. Maeno, Boundary-Layer Meteorology,

065103, (2004).

95, 123-143, (2000).

[17] J. Crassous, D. Beladjine, and A. Valance, Phys.

Rev.Lett., 99, 248001, (2007).

